Caekwad's Oriental Series
Published under the Authority of
the Maharaja Sayajirao University
of Baroda.
General Editor :
B. J. Sandesara,
M, A., Ph, D.
N0. 134
A DICTI0NARY
OF
SANSKRIT 0IRAMMAR


A DICTI0NARY
OF
SANSKRIT 0BRAMMAR
by
Mahimahopadhyaya
KASHINATH VASUDEV ABHYANKAR, M.A.
Retired Professor of Sanskrit, Gujarat College, Ahmedabad.
Hon. Profecr of Sanskrit, Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poong
ORIENTAL INSTITUTE
BARODA
1961
 

First Edition : 1000 Copies.
Printed (on behalf of tbe M - S. University of Baroda Press)
by M. N. Chapekar, Aryasanskriti Mudranalaya, 1575l 2
Sadashiv, Tilak Road, Pcona 2, ard Published on beualf of
the Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda by Dr. 13hogilal,
]. Sandesara, Director, Oriental Institute, Baroda, March, 196I-
Price Rs. 29= 00
Copies can be had from-
Manager,
The University Publications SaIes Unit,
M. S. University of Baroda Press ( sadhana Press ),
near Palace Gate, Palace Road, BARODA.

D ED1CATED
to
The Memory of
the late Mahamahopadhyaya
WASUDEV SHASTRI ABHYANKAR
rmy father, whose example has inspired
me to undertake this and similar
other works on Sanskrit Grammar.


FOREWORD
We take this opportunity to place before the world of Sanskrit
seholars this Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar, which, we are confident,
will be an indispensable reference book for all students working in
this field as well as allied branches of knowledge.
Prof. Kashinath Vasudev Abhyankar has the good fortune to
inherit traditional Sanskrit leanning from his father, Mahamahopर्व-
dhyaya Pandit Vasudevashastri Abhyankar, who is well known for his
translations of The Brahmastra Sakara Bhasya and The Patafjala
Mahabhasya. Prof. Abhyankar had a brilliant academiccareer and is
a reputed teacher and a very well known scholar of Sanskrit Grammar
and Prakrit language and literature. He has himself edited several books,
and is at present bringing out revised editioms of The Patanjala Mahऋ-
bhasya and Paribhasendusekhara and has compiled a Paribhasasangraha
all"of which are being published by the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, Poona. His exhaustive introduction to The Patanjala Maha-
bhasya is enough to show that he is pre-eminently qualified for pre-
paring this Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar, which is a valuable
product of a life-time of devoted scholarship.
We are thankful to the University Grants Commission and the
State Government for the liberal financial assistance they have given
towards publication of this work.
Oriental Institute, Baroda, B. ]. SANDESARA
17-3-1961. Director


1NTRODUCTION
Object of this Dictionary
No apology is needed for undertaking the compilation of the present
* Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar , which, although concise, is expected
to meet the needs of Sanskrit scholars and research students ofVyakarana
and other Shastras by serving as a useful reference book in their study of
and research work in, any branch of Sanskrit learning. The many
independent treatises in the several Shastras and the learned commentaries
upon them, as also the commentaries on classical poems and dramas, arc.in
fact, full of grammatical explanations of words and constructions, involving
a liberal use of grammatical expressions and technical terms at several
places. The elementary knowledge of grammar which a general scholar.of
Sanskrit possesses, is not found sufficient for his understanding fully the
grammatical references in these books, especially so at present, when the
practice of sending young boys to the Tolls and Sanskrit Pathashalas to
study the standard classical works with commentaries along with some
standard elementary treatises on grammar, has already stopped.. The
number of Sanskrit Pandits and Shastris,who had to obtain asound footing i!
grammar before they undertook the study of the higher texts of the several
Shastras, and who therefore could be consulted by young scholars and
research workers in the several Shastras, has also diminished considerably.
The usual Sanskrit Dictionaries such as those of Monier Williams, WS.Apte
and others are found of no avail in supplying explanations of the gramma-
tical technigue which confronts modern scholars at every step in their
critical reading of the several Sanskrit texts. In these circumstances it is
only the technical dictionaries of the type of the present * Dictionary of
Sanskrit Grammar ' that can render a valuable assistance to scholars and
research workers in their reading of the higher Sanskrit texts in the several
Shastras.
Beginnings of Sanskrit Grammar
Every science has necessarily its own terminology and a special
vocabulary. The remark is true with respect to Sanskrit Grammar or
VyakaranaSastra which has developed as a science during the last two
thousand years and has got several technical terms and mumerous words
with a special grammatical significance. The origin of grammar can well-
nigh be traced to the Period of the Brahmanas i. e about 2000 B.C., when
Vedic scholars began to discuss the meaning of the inspire Vedic hymns
by carefully showing disconnected, the words of the Vedic hymns
and noting down the differences in accents as also the changes caused by
their coalescence in the continuous recital or the Samhitapatha. They also
tried to explain the sense of the Vedic words by tracing them back to the
roots ofsuitable senses and laid down rules for their proper and correct

3x
pronunciation. These three pursuits viz. (a) the discussion of the features of
he Pada text, (b) the derivation of words, and c) directions regarding thc
proper pronunciation of the Vedic words, were carried on.with vigour with
a view to preserving the Vedic texts intact, and the treatises dealing. with
these three branches were respectively called by the names Prtisakhya,
Nirukta and Siks, all of which could rightly be called Vyakaraa .9r
Grammar, as they were devoted to determining the correct words as dis-
tinguished from the incorrect ones. Although a number of books wee
written by Vedic scholars in these three branchcs, not more than five or six
Pratisakhya works, a solitary Nirukta work, and a few Siks works are the
only available works at present.
Development of Sanskrit Grammar
In course of time, on the analogy of the derivation of words, an
analysis of the word into its constituent elements such as the base, the afiix,
the augments and the modifications, was undertaken by grammarians. This
separation of the different elements of a word constituted Vyākarana or
grammar, which was developed as an art by ancient grammarians like
Apisali, Skaayana and others before Paini. It was Prini who carried
it to perfection, and his work, the AStadhyayi, compact yct exhaustivc, and
laconic ye clear,is simply a marvellous product of art by a man of amazing
intelligence. As a result, the works on grammar by all ancient scholars
who fourished before Patini disappeared in course of time lcaving only a
few guotations behind them. Pini was followed by a number of grammar-
ians who wrote popular treatiscs on grammar, bascd, no doubt, on Pipini's
grammar, some of which, in their turn came to have auxiliary w rks,
glosses and explanatory commentaries. These different trcatiscs, written by
Sarvavarman, Candragomin, Devanandin, Palyakirti Stkatyana, Hemacan-
dra, KramadiSvara, Jumaranandin, Supad:na and others with their auxi-
liary works and commentaries, came to be looked upon as different systcms
of grammar. These treatises present two kinds of treatment : Some of
them are arrangcd in Stras in the same manner as the Asidhyy of
Panini which treats one after another the several grammatical clements such
as technical terms, padas of roots, case-relations, compound words, krt
afixes, taddhita affixes, substitutes, accents and cuphonic changes while
others give a topic-wise treatment following in that respect the ancicnt
grammarians before Pahini such as Indra, Vedic Skatayana and others who
treated one after another the different topics of grammar such as the eu-
phonic changes, declension, conjugation,compound formation, mouns derived
from roots, nouns derived from nouns and the like. The special featurc of
all these grammars was that they entircly omitted the Vedic peculiaritics
and accents.
Sanskrit Grammar as a Science
The Subject of Sanskrit grammar was first treated as a science by the two
epoch*naking grammarians, first by Katyyana a few centuries aftei Panini,

x!
and then by Patafijali, the exponent of Katyayana who lived in the second
century B. C. It was carried to perfection by the stalwart grammarian
Bhartphari of the seventh century A. D. Later grammarians, prominent
among whom were.jayditya, Vamana, Kaiyaga, Haradatta, Bhattoj, Kon-
dabhatta and Nagesa, developed by their substantial contributions, the work
of Panini as a science to such an extent that the number of smaller and
greater works well nigh rose to eight hundred and that of the authors to
four hundred. The grammar of Panini, which is looked upon as the
standard one at present gives about a hundred technical terms, more than
two hundred suffixes, about two thousand primary roots and more than
five thousand special words arranged in more than two hundred and fifty
classes according to the special grammatical peculiarities shown by each
class- The number of independent primary words, besides these five
thousand special words, if roughly estimated, may exceed even twenty-five
thousand. Besides these primary roots, primary nouns, affixes and tech-
nical terms in the different Shastras, there is a vast number of secondary
roots and secondary nouns, which is rather impossible even to be appro-
ximately determined.
Nature and Scope of this Dictionary
The preparation of a comprehensive dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar,
a subject which has been developed fully by Sanskrit Grammarians for the
last two thousand years, is certainly a stupendous work which can only be
done by a band of grammarians who have got a sound footing in the sub-
ject. In the light of what has been said above, the present dictionary is only
an honest and humble attempt in that direction made by the compiler who
was inspired to undertake this rather arduous venture by his close study of
the subject for more than sixty years according to the traditional method of
the East, combined with the critical and comparative method of the West.
As the work was done single-handed, and finished within a limited
time with a view to making it available to students and scholars of Sans-
krit at as early a date as possible, the number of books consulted was a
limited one. The number of entries is more than four thousand out of
which the important ones are in the form of short articles supplying very
briefiy the necessary information from the different sources with guota-
tions from or references to the original works. All the standard works in
grammar have been carefully consulted including the available Pratisई-
khya works, the Mahabhsya, the Ksik, the,Vakyapadya, the Siddhānta-
Kaumudi and others. The Katantra, the Sakatyana, the Jainendra, the
Haima and other grammars, as also the different Paribhasa works have
been consulted at important places. Minor works and commentaries are
not consulted as the important words and topics occurring therein have
been mostly included here on account of their occurrence in the major
works. Attention is, of course, paid to grammatical importance and
significance, and only such such words and such senses of them as have a
grammatical significance, have been included in the present dictionary
along with affixes, augments, substitutes and technical terms mostly given

xii
in Pद्वnini's grammar. Names of authors and books, printed as well as
found in a manuscript form, have been included as fair as practicable in
the present work. A scrupulous attention has been Paid to the Pratisakhya
works, the Mahabhasya and the Ksika which are locked upon as Supreme
ly authoritative in the field of Sanskrit grammar.. [t just be admitted
that the scholarly index works of Dr. BCthlingk and Dr. Renou were found
very useful in providing references to standard gjanmar works
Th3 abbreviations for the titles of books consulted and those of gra-
mmatical terms are given separately at the beginning of the Present
* Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar.' Names of books and authors have
been sometimes given in the Roman script and sometimes in the Deva-
nagari script.
Conclusion
Acknowledgements are due to Mr. M. N. Chapekar, Aryasanskriti
Mudranalaya, Poona, who has given ample co-operation in getting this
Dictionary printed in the shortest possible time. For facility of printing,
accents of Vedic passages and words are not shown, nor italics have been
used for Sanskrit terms written in the Roman script nor the breaking of
a word at the end of a line is done scrupulously at the end of a syllable or
a constituent part. In spite of all possible care, some slips have crept in
for which the indulgence of the reader is craved. It is cxpected that
Samskrit scholars will make full use of this work and offer their valuable
suggestions for future undertakings of this type.
A sincere sense of gratitude must be conveyed to Dr. Bhogilal J-
Sandesara, the Director of the Oriental Institute, Baroda, at whose initia-
tive the project of this * Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar,' undertaken
some years ago, but postponed from time to time, was not only pursued
with vigour, but completed and turned into a volume in the Gaekwad
Oriental Series.
601-2 Sadashiv Peth,
Laxmi Road, Poona 2.
Varshapratipada, Shake 1883.
17-3-61.
K. V. ABHYANKAB.

HINTS FOR THE USE OF THIS DICTIONARY
l. Words in this dictionary are arranged in the serial order of the
Sanskrit alphabet which is current everywhere, viz. the fourteen vowels
beginning with अ and ending with औ, and then the thirtythree consonants
.consisting of the five guttural, the five palatal,the five cerebral, the five den-
tal and the five labial consonants and then the four semi-vowels and the
four ants ＾ is taken as a combination of क् and ष्, and ， as one of
ऊ and ञ्जम् .
2. Words are given in their noun-base ( प्रातपादक ) such as अकर्मक,
अकार, अक्षर etc., without the addition of any case affix.
3. At places of option where any one of the anusvara and the
parasavarna could be used, the anusvara is consistently used, and a place
after the vowels and before the consonants is assigned to it in the alpha-
betical order. For example, the words containing anusvara such as संकर्ष, सेक्रम,
संचय, संज्ञा, संतान, सेधि, संप्रसारण, संयेोग, संवरण, सेंसर्ग, संहिता etc., are all placed after स
and before सक्, सकर्मक etc.
4, Each word entered, has got only one paragraph assigned to it,
although the explanation of the word may cover sometimes a full page
Or 11Ore.
5. The meaning or meanings of a word are given immediately
after it, and therefore no capital letter is used at the beginning of the word
with which each meaning begins. _
6. The various senses of a word are given one after another with
serial numbers placed before them. The several senses of a word are
arranged as far as possible in their chronological order oforigin.
7. The various senses are usually illustrated with Guotations from
standard authors with full references as fair as possible. From among the
Pratisakhya works, the Rkprtisakhya is generally guoted,while from among
the numerous grammar works, the Mahabhasya and the Kasika are
guoted profusely.
8. The first figure in references, which is generally the Roman
one, refers to the main section such as the adhyaya or the Karlda or the
Patala, while the next one refers to the subordinate sections, such as the
staha or the Sitra or the like. When there are three figures they refer to
the adhyaya, the pada and the Sutra in the case of Panini, and to the
Mandala,.the Sukta and the stanza in the case of the Rksarhhit.
9.' When a particular form is illustrated, the illustration begins
with the abbreviation *e.g.'; while usually, when the sense given is illustra-
ted, the explanation or the quotation in Sanskrit begins with the abbrevia-
tion *cf',

xiv
10. Bach of the different senses of a word or of the uses of a word
in different ways, begins with a separate numbcr.(!), (2), (3), etc.: when
however, the same sense is given with different shades of it, by words which
are practically synonymous, no separate numbers arc given, the shades of
sensis being separated by a colon, or by a comma
11. As the senscs given in such dictionaries are more or less
technical or conventional, the literal or the usual scnse of the words is given
only when it is allied to the conventional scnsc-
12.
Sat.skrit words are generally given in the Devanagari script;
when, however, the Roman script is used, the diacritical marks which are
in current use at present, are employed.
LIST OF WORKS AND AUTHORS CONSULTED
( In order of abbreviations used )
A. Pr.=Atharvaveda Pratisakhya.
Asadhyayi=Paninis Astidhyayf.
Bh. Vr.= Bhagvrtti ot Purusottarma-
deva. _
Bhar. Sks = Bharadvaja SikSa.
C. Vy., Can. Vy. = Cindra Vyaka-
raha_
Dhatuvrtti = Madhaviya Dhituvrtti.
Durgacarya - Durgacarya's commen-
tary on the Nirukta.
Durgasirhha=Durgasirhha's Katantra-
Suitravptti. _
Durgh. Vr = Durghatavrtti of Sara-
nadeva. -
Hem.=Hemacandra's Sabdanusasana.
Hem. Pari.=Hemacandra's Paribh-
sapatha as given by Hemaharhsa-
gani.
Jain., Jain. Vy.=Jainendra Vyaka-
rana by Pjyapada Devanandin.
Jain. Pari. =Jainendra Paribhavrtti
by K. V. Abhyankar.
Kaiy., Kaiyata == Kaiyata's
bhasyapradipa.
Kalapa - Kalapa-Vyakaranasutra.
Kas.=Kasika ofJayaditya and Vam-
ana
Maha-
Ks. viv. = Ksikavivaraapafijiki,
known by the name Nyasa.
Kat. = Katantra Vyakaraha Sutra.
i Kar. Pari. Durg. = Katantra Paribhव्र-
savrtti by Durgasimha.
Kiv. Prak.= Kivyapraksa of Marn-
mata.
Laghumajts =
Nagesa.
M. Bh. = Mahabhya of Patanjali
on the Stºtras of Panini (IDr.
Kiclhorn's edition ).
Mahibhasya Vol. VII =The Volurnc
of the introduction in Marathi to
the Pataijala Mahabhasya, wiitten
by K. V. Abhyankar and publi-
shed by the :?. E. Society, Poona.
Mahbhasyadipik= commentary on
the Mahibhasya by Bhartrhari.
Muktavali = Nyayamuktvalt of
WiSvamathapaficinana.
Laghumajusa of
| Nandikesvara=Nandikesvarakrika.
Nir.= Nirukta of Yaska.
Ta.5ea_kaBHLक __-_
| Nyasa=Ksikavivaraapafjik, a corn-
किentary.om the Kasikavrtti by
Jinendrabuddhi, called Nysa.
P, Pan=Paninis Asdhyay.

Padamafijar = Padamafijari, a com-
mentary on the Kasikavrtti by
Haradatta.
Pan. Sik.=Siks of Pnini.
Par. Bhas. = Paribhasbhaskara of
Haribhaskara Agnihotr.
Par. Sek. = Paribhasendusekhara of
Nagesa.
Paramalaghuma्jus = Paramala-
ghumajtis ofNagesabhatta.
Pari. Sang. = Paribhassaragraha by
K. V. Abhyankar.
Phit Sutra=Santanava's Phisutra.
Pradipa = Kaiyata's Mahabhsyapra-
dipa.
Purusottam=Purusottamadevas Pari-
bhagavrtti. _
R. Pr. =Rgvedapratisakhya by Sau-
naka ( Sanskrit Sahityaparisad
Edition, Calcutta.)
R. T. = Rktantra Pratisakhya.
R. V., Rgveda, Rk. Sarhh =Rgveda-
, sarhhit.
Sabdakaustubha = Sabdakaustubha
, of Bhattoj Diksita.
Sak. =Sakayana's Sabdanussana.
Sak. Pari = Sakatyana Paribhas-
patha.
S. K. Sid.Kau. =Siddhantakaumudi.
Siradeva Srradeva's Paribhas-
vrtti.
Siva Stºtra = Mahesvarastras.
xv
Sing-Prak. = Sringrapraksa
Bhoja.
T. Pr.=Taittiriya Pratisakhya.
Tait. Safnh.=Taittiriya Sarhhit.
Tattvabodh. = Tattvabodhin
Ufinendrasarasvati.
Tattvacintamani = Tattvacintamani
of Gangesopadhyaya.
Tribhasyaratna = commentary on
the Taittiriya Prtisakhya.
Uddyota Mahabhasya-Pradipod-
dyota by Nagesa.
Un. Stºtra = Undistrapaficapadi.
Un. Stºtravr. = Unadistravrtti
Ujjwaladatta.
Upamanyu = Nandikesvarakarik्-
bhasya by Upamanyu .
Uvvata = Uvvaa's Bhasya on the
Pratisakhya works. _
V. Pr. = Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya.
Vaidikbharana = commentary on
the Taittiriya Pratisakhya.
Vaiyakaranabhप्sana=Kondabhatta's
Vaiyakarajabhishasara.
Vak. Pad. =Vikyapadya of Bhartp-
hari.
Wak. Pad. tika = Commentary on
Bhartphari's Vakyapadya.
V., Vart. = Varttikas on the Suitras
of Panini as given in the Maha-
bhasya (Dr. Kielhorn's edition.)
Vydi=Vydiparibhassicana.
of
by
by
 

ABBREVIATIONS USED.
abl. ablative case.
above a reference to some preced-
ing word, not necessarily on the
same page.
acc. accusative case.
adj. adjective.
adv. adverb.
Ahn. Ahnika
Mahabhasya.
aor. aorist.
Atm or Atmanep. Atmanepada.
caus, causal.
cf. confer, compare.
com. commentary.
compa compound.
cond. conditional.
conj. conjugation.
dat. dative case.
deside desiderative.
dual. dual number.
ed. edition.
e.g exempli gratia, for example.
etc. et cctera, and others.
f., fem. feminine.
freg. frequentative.
fut. future.
gen. genitive case.
gend. gender.
gr. grammar,
i.e. id est, that is.
imperf imperfect.
impera imperative.
of the Patafijala
| ind. indeclinable.
inf. infinitive.
ins., inst. instrumental case.
krt. krt (affix).
lit. literally.
loc. ) locative case.
masc. masculine gender.
ms. manuscript.
neut. neuter gender.
nom. nominative case.
Pan. Panini,
p-p.p. past passive participle.
Parasmai. Parasmaipada.
pari. paribhas.
part. participle.
pass passive voice.
perf perfect.
pers. person.
pl. plural.
pres. present tense.
prOn pronoun.
Sec. Second.
sing singular.
Subj. subjunctive.
suf. suffix.
tad, taddhita affix.
Vart. Varttika (on
Panini).
Wed. Vedic.
vide see
v !- varia lectio, another reading.
the Sutra of
voc. vocative case.

A Dictionary 0 Sanskrit Grammar.
अ (1)the first letter of the alphabet
in Sanskrit and its derived langua-
ges, representing the sound a (अ):
(2) the vowel a (अ) representing in
grammatical treatises, except when
Prescribed as an affix or an aug-
ment or a substitute,all its eighteen
varieties caused by accentuation
or nasalisation or lengthening: (3)
Personal ending a (अ) of the perf.
sec-pl.and first and third pers.sing.:
(4) krt affix c (अ) prescribed espe-
cially after the denominative and
Secondary roots in the sense of the
yerbal activity e. g. बुभुक्षां, चिन्त,
ईक्षां, चच etc.cf. अ प्रत्ययात्etc. (P.III
3.102-100); (5) sign of the aorist
mentioned as a? (अङ्क) or ca? (चङ्क)
by Panini in P. III i.48 to 59 e.g.
अगमत्, अचीकरत्: (6) conjugational
sign uentioned as S्2 (दाय्) or & (दा)
by Panini in P. III.1.68, 77. e.g.
भवति, तुदति etc.; (7) augment a
(अम्) as prescribed by P. VI.1.58;
e- g. द्रष्टा, द्रक्ष्यति : (8) augment a!
(अद्) prefixed to a root in the im-
perf. and aorist tenses and in the
conditional mood e. g. अभवत्, अभूत्,
अभावेष्यत् cf. P. VI.4.71: (8) ;
afix c (अ) prescribed as अङ्क, अवृ,अनु,
अण्, अन्, अप्र, क्र, ख, घ, ञ्ज, ट, ड, ण, etc.
in the third Adhyaya of Pahinis
Astadhyayi; (9) tad. affix a (अ)
mentioned by Panini as अच्, अञ्ज, |
अणु, अ etc. in the fourth and the
fifth chapters of the Agadhyay of
Panini; (10) the samsntaaffix a
(अ), as also statcd in the form of
the samsnta affixes (डच् , अच्,
ट,षच्, घ, अप्, and अञ्ज) by Pनnini
in V.4. 73 to 121 ; (11) substitute a
(अय्) accentcd grave for इदम
before case-affixes beginning with
the ins. case: (12) remnant (अ)
of the negative particle न् after
the clision of the consonant
n (न्) by नलेोपी नज्ञः P. vi. 3.73.
， ( ') nasal utterance called अनुस्वार
and written as a dot above the
vowel preceding it. cf. स्वरमनु संलीनं
इव्द्यत इति: it is pronounced after a
vowel as immersed in it. The
anusvra is considered (l> as only
a nasalization of the preceding
vowel being in a way completely
amalgamated with it. cf. T. Pr. V.
1 1,31 ; XV. 1; XXII. 14 ; (2) as
a nasal addition to the preceding
vowel, many times prescribed in
grammar as ta! (नुट् ) or htti (नुम् )
which is changed into anusvara in
which case it is looked upon as a
sort ofa vowel, while, it is looked
upon as a consonant when it is
changed into a cognate of the
following consonant (परसवर्ण) or re-
tained as ) (न्). cf. P. VIII.4.58;
(3) as a kind cfconsonant of the
type of nasalized half g (ग्) as des-
cribed in some treatises of the
Yajurveda Prtiईakhya: cf also R.
Pr,1.22 V. Pr.14.148-9. The vowel
element of the anusvra became
more prevalent later on in Pali,
Prakrit, Apabhrarhsa and in the
spoken modern languages while
the consonantal element became
more predominant in classical
Sanskrit.
औद्भिासमास the same as एकदेशिसमास or
अवयवसमास or अवयवषष्ठीतत्पुरुप्र prescrib-
ed by the rule पूर्वापराधरोत्तरोमकददिनेका-

_
औषु|्, also औच्चादिगण a class of words
अ ः ( ः ) visarga called visarjanjya in
अङ्गण 2
धिक्ररंभ P. II.2.1 and the following
P. II.2.2 and 3; c. g. पूर्व्यः;
अपरक्राय:, अर्धपिप्पली etc.
headed by अंशु which have their
last vowel accentcd acute when
thcy stand at the end of a tat-
purusa compound with the word
भ्रति as the first member, cf P.
W. 2. 193.
ancient worksand shown in Writing
by two dots, one below the other,
exactly of the same size, like the
pair ofbreasts ofa maiden as jocu-
larly expressed by Durgasirhha.
cf. अ: इति विसर्जनीयः | अकार इहृ उचार-
णार्थः | कुमारीस्तनयुगाकृतिर्वेणे विसर्जनीयसंज्ञे
भवति ( दुर्गसिंहृ on कातन्त्र !.1.16).
विसर्ग is always a dependcnt letter
included among the Ayogavha
letters and it is looked upon as a
vowel whcn it forms a part of thc
preceding vowel; while it is lookcd
upon as a consonant when it is
changed into the jihvamliya or
the Upadhmaniya letter.
< क् (<) जिह्वामूलीय, represented by a
sign like the चछ in writing, as stated
by Durgasimha who remarks वंव्रा-
कृतिर्वर्ण जिह्वामूलीयसंज्ञो भवति. The.jihva-
miliya is only a voiceless breath
following the utterance of a vowel
and preceding the utterance of
the gutteral letter क् or ख्. It is
looked upon as a letter (वर्ण), but
dependent upon the following
consonant and hence looked upon "
as a consonant. e. g. विष्णु < करोति.
< प् (<) Upadhmaniya represented
by a sign like the temple of an ele-
phantas stated by Durgasirhha who
remarks * गजकुम्भाकृतिर्वर्ण उपध्मानीयसंज्ञा
भवति.' KatI. It is a voiceless breath
following the utterance ofa vowel
and preceding the utterance of the
labial letter ) ( प्र ) or ph ( फ ). It
अकथित
is lookcd upon as a letter ( वर्ण ),
but dcpendent upon the following
consonant and hence lookcd upon
as a consonant.
अ:्र name givcn to the ?tont. case
in the Tarittiryd PrtiSikhyd.cfअ:क्रार
इति प्रथमविभकैरपलक्षणम् T. Pr. I. 23.
अक् ( 1 ) condensed expression
(प्रत्याहुर ) reprcscnting the letters
अ, इ, उ, ऋ and ल in Panini's
Grammar cf. P. VI. 1. 12, 101:
VII. 4.2. ( 2 ) sign (र्विक्ररण) of the
benedictive in Vedic Literature in
the case of the root दृढ c. g. भितरं च
दृश्ये '. III. 1. 80 V 2: ( 3 ) rcmm-
ant of the termination अक्रच् P. V.
3. 71 ; ( 4 ) substitute (अदेशे) अक्रङ्क
for thc last vowel of the word
सुधा ( P. IV. I. 97 ) e. g. सेोधात:क्रः.
अक्र (1) affix अक्र substituted for the
affix बु given in Panini's Grammar
as- प्रबुद्ध as in अ[्, इंथिक (P.III.
3. 1 1 1); ण्युट् as in करिक्र:, भञ्जकं ऋज्ञत,
द्विवार्चक (P. III. 1. 133, III. 3.
10, 108): बुच् as in उपक्र: (t?.V.8.80);
बु as in निन्दकः, राजक्रम्, भालवक्र: ( P.
III. 2. 146, IV. 2. 39, 58 ctc. );
बुन् as in प्रव्रक्र:, संरक्र:; मर्कः, पदक:.
III.1. 149, IV. 2. 61 ctc.
अकङ्क substitute ( अद् ) for the last
letter of the word सुधावृ prescribcd
along with the tad. allix इव् by P.
IV. 1. 97. c. g. संधात:
अकच् affix prescribed before thc last
syllable of pronouns and indcclin-
ables without any specific scnse
for it (P. V.3.71) c. g. सर्वक्रः, उच्चकै:
etc.
अकथित not mentioncd by any other
casc-relation such as अथाद्[न, संप्रदान
and अधिकरण: statcd with respect
to thc indirect object, governed
by roots posscssing two objects
such as दुद्, यज्ञ and others, which
in the passive voice is put in
the mominative case. The in-

अकम्पित
अकालक
direct object is called a kathita
because in some cases there
exists no other case-relation as,
for example, in पौरवं गां याचत of
भिक्षते, or माणवकं पन्थानं पृच्छति: while,
in the other cases, the other
case-relations (with the activity
expressed by the verb) are wil-
fully suppressed or ignored al-
though they exist, as for instance
in गां दोग्धि पयः, अन्ववरुणाद्व गां त्रजम्: see
अकथितं च P. 1. 4.5l and the Mahव-
bhasya thereon.
अकम्पित not shaken; tremulous said
with respect to vowels in Vedic
utterance, kampa being looked
upon as a fault of utterance.. cf
अकेापतान् , कम्पनं नाम स्त्रराश्रितपाठदेघः
प्रायेण दाक्षिणात्यानां भवति | तलुपलक्ष्य स वज्यै:
R. Pr. III. 31.
अक a case-relation excepting that
of the subject to the verbal acti-
vity. cf. अक्रतीरे च कारके संज्ञायाम् P.
III. 3.19.
अकमेक intransitive, without any ob-
ject, (said with regard to roots
which cannot possess an object or
whose object is suppressed or
ignored). The reasons for suppres-
sion are briefy given in the well-
known stanza : धातोरर्थान्तर वृतघत्वर्थ-
नीपसंग्रह्यात् | प्रसिद्धेरविवक्षातः कमेणेs कर्मिका-
क्रिया | In the case of intransitive
roots, the verbal activity and its
= fruit are centred in one and the
same individual wiz. the agent or
क्रतौcf. फलव्यापारयोरेकानष्ठतायामकर्मक: Vak.
Pad.
अकाण्डताण्डच name of the commen-
tary by Harinatha on the Pari-
bhasendusekhara ( परिभाषेन्दुशेखर ) of
NageSabhatta.
अकाम ( अक्रमसेधि ) an invariable (नित्य)
' euphonic change ( सेधि ) such as
the dropping of the consonant r
( र् ) when followed by r.cf. R. Pr.
IV. 9, रोदयेी डप्यते द्वाधितोपधा हखस्या-
क्रामनियता उभाधिमो	c. g. युवे रजांसि,
सुयमासो अश्वा रथ: R. V. I. 180.1.
अक्,र the lettcr d ( अ ) inclusive of
all its eighteen kinds caused by
shortness, length, protraction,
accentuation and nasalization in
Panini's grammar, in cases where
ट (अ) is not actually prescribed as a
termination or an augment or a
substitute. cf. अणुदित्सवर्णस्य न्वाप्रत्ययः P.
I. 1.73. The letter is generaily
given as the first letter of the
alphabet ( वर्णसमाम्नाय ) in all Pra-
tisºkhya and grammar works
except in the alphabet termed
VarnopadeSa, as mentioned in the
Rk Tantra cf ए ओ ऐ औ अा ऋ ल्
ई उ ऋ ल इ उ आ:	रयवला: | डज्ञणनमा: |
________अ: * क * पाः । हु · खं ] ， अं
अां एवमुपदेशे etc. R. T.1.4.
अकारक not causing any verbal
activity; different from the kra-
kas or instruments of action such
as the agent, the object, the
instrument, the recipient ( संप्रदान ),
the separated ( अपादान ) and the
location, ( अधिकरण ) cf. M. Bh. on
I.4.23, 29 and 51 and on II.3.1.
अकाये not a grammatical positive
operation: e. g. elision (लीप.) cf.
ननु च लेीप एवत्कार्यं स्यात् | अकार्य लेीपः |
M. Bh. on I.3.2.
अकालक्र (1) not limited by any time-
factors for its study such as cer-
tain periods of the day or the
year. (2) not characterized by any*
technical terms expressive of
time such as ddyatami, droli
occurring in the ancient Prati-
5akhya and grammar works. The
term all tha is used by the
writers of the Kasikavrtti in con-
nection with the grammar of
Panini. cf. *पाणिभ्युपशमकालकं व्याकरणम्'
Kas. on P. II.4.2l explained by
the writer of the Padamafijar as

अकालपक्
पूर्वाणि ब्याकरणानि अद्यतनादेकालपरिभाषा-
युक्तानि तद्रहृितम् !
अकालप्, different from thc Kilpa !
or the revised Ktantra Gram-
mar cf. पाणिन्युपज्ञमकालापकं ब्याकरणम् Ks.
On P. II.4.2 .
अर्कत् not marked by the mute
letter ः ( क् ) and hence not dis-
allowing guna or vrddhi sub-
stitutes for the preceding vowel, cf. !
सृजिदृढीइल्यमकितिP. VI. 1.58; द्5-
क्रत: P. VII. 4.83.
अच्त् lit. non-krt: an affix applicd
to a root, but different from thc
conjugational affixes. cf. अकृत्सार्व-
धातुक्रयेदर्ध: P. VII. 4.25.
अछत not established; said of a
grammatical operation which has
not taken place e. g. अकृतसंधिक्रार्यम्
M. Bh. on V. 2.100, W. 3.84, also
कृताकृतप्रसङ्गि नित्यम् M. Bh. on VI.
4.62.
अछतकारि doing or accomplishing
what is not done Cr accompli-
shed; the expression is uscd in
connection with grammatical
operations like हृस्वरण or द्र्धकर्ण
only in cases where it is nccessary
i, e. where already thcrc is no
hrasva or drgha cf. अकृतकारि खलुध्ि
|्त्रमा्त् | तद्यथा • अनिर्वेददग्धं तद्हृति !
M. Bh. on VI. 1.127. Thc rules
of Grammar, like fire, are applicd
to places where they produce a
change.
अछतव्यूहृ short expression for the
grammatical maxim अकृतव्यूह्याः पाणे-
नीया: which means *the followers of
Panini do not insist on the taking
effect of a rule when its caus6
or causes disappear.* See Par.
Sek. Par. 56.
अछतस्तघ word or expression with-
out the necessary euphonic chan-
ges cf वरुणदेनां च तृर्तायात् स च
अकृतंसंघानाम् P. V. 3.84 vrt. 1.
4
अक्रियाज
अकृतसंहित words cnding with a
| breathing or visarga which are
:ot lookcd upoin as placcd immnc-
diatcly beforc the ncxt word and
| hcnce which have no combination
with the following vowel c. g. एष
| |् अरुचेः R. V. 1x.8.1.
| अछत्रम non-tcchnical: not formcd
| or not arrivcd at y granamatical
opcrations such as thc applica-
tion of affiixcs to crudc bases
and so on ; natural; assigncd ouly
by accident. cf the gram. maxim
कृत्रिiश्वसये: अभे संप्रत्ययः which
mcans * in cascs ( f Clou])t whcthcr
an operation refers to that cx-
presscd by the technical scnse or
to that which is cxpresscd by the
ordinary scn8c of a tcrm, thc
opcration rcfers to what is cxpre-
, ssed by the tcclamical scnse.'' Par.
| Sek. Par.9 also M. Bh. on I. 1.28.
| अक्रत्स्न-अत्रुन, an epithet applicd to
the pronunciation of Vcda words
impropcrly which docs not
scrvc any uscfull purposc. cf.
अकृत्स्ने अप्रथेन इत्यर्थ: Uvata on R.
Pr. XIV. 68.
_K _-
अकुत् not possessing thc mutc lcttcr
ः () or : (ग्) or i ( इ ) and hencc
not prevcnting the gu"a and
vrddhisubstitutes for the prcccding
vowel, if they occur. e. g. मृजेर्-
त्सु प्रत्येषु मृक्षप्रस मार्ज: सभुर्भवति !
M.Bh. on P. [.I.i. Vart.10.
अत dcfinite, known or spccificd
dcfinitely. cf. अक्तपरिमाणानामर्थानां
वाचक्रं भवाति य Uते संरब्रूयाद्ब्दः परिमाण-
इच्दश्च M. Bh. I.1.72.
अक्रियाज not a result of a verbal acti-
vity , the expression is used in con-
ncction with qualitics ( on a sub-
stance) as opposed to the activities
found in it. cf. अाधयश्राऋथज्ञश्च सेs
सत्त्वप्रक्र्त्ण: M. Bh. on IV. 1.44.

अक्षद्युतादिगण
अक्षद्यूतादिगण a class of words headed
by अक्षदूत which take thc tad. affix
:hak ( इक) in the scnse of*resulting
from' e. g. अाक्षद्युतिकं वैरम्, जानुप्रहृतक्रम्,
गातागातकम् etc. cf. P IV.4.19.
अक्षर a letter of the alphabet, such
as o (अ) or i (इ) or i (हृ) or 3 (य्) or
the like The word was originally
applied in the Pratisakhya works
to vowels (long, short as also pro-
tracted), to consonants and the
ayogawaha letters which were tied
down to them as their appendages.
Hence अक्षर came later on to mean
a syllable i. e. a vowel with a con-
sonant or consonants preceding or
following it, or without any con-
sonant at ail. cf. ओजा हृस्वाः समितक्रान्ताः
स्वराणामन्ये दीघ उभय अक्षराणिRPr. I 17-19
cf.एकाक्षरा, यक्षरा etc. The term aksa-
ra was also applied to any letter
(वर्ण), be it a vowel or a conso-
nant, cf the terms एकाक्षर, सन्ध्यक्षर,
समानाक्षर used by Patanjali as also by
the earlier writers. IFor the etymo-
logy of the term see Mahabhsya
अक्षरं न क्षरं विद्यात्, अश्रोतर्वा सरीSक्षरम् वृ
वाहुः पूर्वसूत्रे | M. Bh. Ahnika 2 end.
क्त name given to the
dvipada viri versesdivided into |
padas of five syllables. cf विराजो
द्विपदाः केचित् सर्वा आहुश्चतुष्पदः कृत्वा
पञ्चाक्षरान्पादांस्तास्तथाSक्षरपङ्क्तयः R. Pr.
XVII. 50.
अक्षरसमाम्नाय alphabet: traditional
enumeration of phonetically inde-
penent letters generally begin-
ning with the vowel a (अ). Al-
though the number of letters and
the order in which they are stat-
ed differ in differcnt treatises,
still, qualitatively they are much
the same. The Sivastitras, on which
Panini's grammar is based, enu-
merate 9 vowels, 4 semi-vowels,
twenty five class-consonants and 4 |
sibilants. The.nine vowels are five
अक्षरसमाम्नाय
simple vowels or monothongs (सम-
न[श्र) as tlacy are callcd in ancient
treatises, and the lour diphthongs,
( सन्ध्यक्षर ). The four semi-vowels
3, ध्, r, /, ( य् व् र् ल् ) or antastha-
varna, the twenty five class-conso-
marts or mutes called sparsa, and
the four isman letters s, s,s and h
( द् ध् सु इ ) are the same in all the
Prtisakhya and grammar works
although in thc Pratiskhya works
the semi-vowelsare mentionedafter
the class consonants.The difference
in numbers, as noticed, for exam-
ple in the maximum number which
reaches 65 in the Wjasaneyi-
Prtisakhya, is due to the separate
mention of the long and protract-
ed vowels as also to the inclusion
of the Ayogavaha letters, and their
number. The Ayogavaha letters
are anusvara, visarjaniya,.jihvami-
liya, upadhmintya, nisikya, four
yamas and svarabhakti. The Rk
Pratisakhya does not mention I (ल),
but adding long -ं (अा) i (ई) ， (ऊ)
and T (ऋ) to the short vowels,
mentions 12 vowels, and mention-
ing 3 Ayogavahas (< क्, = प् and ओ)
lays down 48 letters. The Rk
Tantra Pratiskhya adds the
vowel i (ल) (short as also long)
and mentions 14 vowels, 4 semi-
vowels, 25 mutes, 4 sibilants and
by adding 10 ayogavahas viz.
4 yamas, nasikya, visarjanya
jihvamilya, upadhmaniya and two
kinds ofanusvara, and thus brings
the total number to 57. The Rk
Tantra makes a separate enume-
ration by putting diphthongs first,
long vowles afterwards and short
vowels still afterwards, and puts
semi-vowels first before mutes, for
purposes of framing brief terms or
pratyaharas. This enumeration is
called varnopadesa in contrast

अक्षराङ्ग
with the other one which is called
varnoddesa. 'iThe Taittirjya Pr्-
tisºkhya adds protracted vowcls
and lays down 60 letters : The
Sik of Panini lays down 63 or
64 letters, while the Vijasa-
neyi-Pratiskhya gives 65 letters.
cf. V. Pr, VIII. 1-25. Thc
alphabet of the modern Indian
Languages is bassed on the
Varnasammnya given in thc
Vijasaneyi-Pratisºkhya. The Pr्-
tisakhyas call this enumeration by |
the name Varpa-samimmya.
The Rk.tantra uses the terms Aka- !
and Brahmari )
rasammnaya
which are picked up latcr on by
Patafijali.cf. सेीयमक्षरसमाम्नाये वाक्समाम्नाय: ;
पुष्पितः फलितश्चन्द्रतारकवत् प्रतिमण्डितो वेदि- !
तंव्ये ब्रह्मरार्दिताः | सर्ववेदपुण्यफलावाश्वास्य ज्ञाने !
भवति , मातापितरौ चास्य स्वर्ग लोके महीयेते | |
M. Bh. Ahnika.2-end.
अक्षराङ्ग forming a part of a sy- !
llyble just as the anusvra ( nasa]
utterance ) or svarabhakti (vowcl-
part) which forms a part of the
preceding syllable. cf. अनुस्वारो
ब्यञ्जनं चाक्ष्राङ्गम् R. Pr. I.22, also
स्वरभक्तिः पूर्वभागक्षराङ्गम् R. Pr. I.32.
अखण्डशाब्द्बेघ unitary import; the
meaning of a sentence collectivcly
understood.
अगाते (1) absence of any othcr re-
" course or alternative. cf. अगत्या ईि
खलु परिभाषाश्रयते. Purusottamadcva-
Pari. vrtti Pari.1 19: (2) which is not
a word termed gati. cf. चनचिाद्ब्त्रा-
दितद्धिताप्रेडितेष्वगते: P. V[ I.1.57.
अगमकत्वे non-communicativeness,
* inability to communicate adc-
guately the intended meaning. cf.
सविशेषणानां वृतिस्तर्हि कस्मान्न भवति !
अगमक्रत्वात् M. Bh on HI. 1.1: cf. also
- अगमक्र: निर्द: अनिर्दढाः !
अगुण् non-secondary, principal; cf.
' ' धुवचेष्टितयुक्तिषु चाप्यगुणे तदनेल्पमतर्वेचैनं स्मरत
M. Bh. on I. 4.51.
अगृहीत uncomprchcndcd, uninclud-
ed cf.नाण्ीतविशेषणा इक्तिर्विशेष्यमुपसंक्रामति ;
cf also न्इत्रे इत्यत्र अर्हीतसंवर्णानामचां
ग्रहृणम् Padamajjar on K: VIII.
3.57.
आ a term in the K्tantra grammar
for a word cnding in f ( इ ) or ta
( उ ) cf. इदुदञ्जिः -ंt. II. 18, अ|्रमेs
र: Kit. I. 1.50.
अ|्पिद्द्विगण a class of words headcd
by the word अग्निपद् to which the
tad. affix अणु is addcd in the
scrscs of ' given thcre ' or * done
thcre * e. g. अञ्जिपदम. cf. अणुप्रकरणे
अ|्दिादिभ्य उपसंख्यानम् P. V. 1.97
Vr. 1.
_<-
आश््श्् an ancicnt writcr of Vcdic
grammar mentioned in the
Taittirya PritiSikhya. cf. क्रपवर्गपरश्च
(चसर्ग:) अहिर्नवेद्यघाल्मीक्ये: ( मतन ऊष्माणं न
अाप्ते ) T.Pr. IX. 4.
writer of
Vedic grammar, mentioned in the
Taittiriya Prtikhya. cf. नघधट्या-
यनुस्य ( मते उदतपर्: स्वरितपरे वा अनुद्रासः
रुव्रतं नापद्यते इति न) Tait. Pr. XIV.82.
अग्नौकरचााणन्याय analogy convcycd by
the expression अर्हीं करवाणि implying
permission to the agent to d6
ccrtain otherthings in a sacrificial
scssion when, as a rmatter of fact,
he is only permitted to work as an
agept at , the sacrificial action
( अर्पीकरण ), by virtue of thc reply
* कुरु ' to his rcquest madc in the
Sentence अग्नौ करवा. cf. अर्धीरवाणि-
न्यूथेन भविष्यति M. Bh.on. II. 2.24.
अग्र the original Sarhlita text as oppo-
scd to pratnta ( तृण्ण ) or pada-
pitha, (पदपाठ) which is thc rccital of
separate words.
अश्रवाल (Vasudcva-Sarana Agravala),
a modern scholar of Sanskrit
grammar, the author of *India as
known to Panini*. _

अग्रहण
अश्रदृण non-inclusion, non-compre-
hension. cf. विभक्तौ लिङ्गविशिष्टाग्रहृणम्
Par. Sekh. Par. 72, M. Bh. ViI.
L*1 Vºrt. 13.
अग्लोप elision of the vowel ,
, , ? or } ( अ, इ, उ, ऋ or ल ) which
prevents Sanvadbhava cf. सन्त्रछधुनि
वङ्कपरSनग्लेपे P. VII. 493, as also
नाग्लेोपिासूनृादेताम् VII. 4.2 where the
elision prevents the shortening of
the penultimate vowel if it is long.
अघोष unvoiced, merely breathed;
a term applied to the surd conso-
nants, S, S s, and Visargc which are
uttered by mere breathing and
which do not produce any sonant
effect. cf. T. Pr. I. 12: R. Pr.[. 1 1.
The term jit ( जित् ) is used for
these letters as also for the first
two consonants of a class in the
Vijasaneyi-Pratisakhya cf. द्वौ द्वौ
प्रथमेो जितू: ऊष्माणश्च हृवर्जम् V. Pr.
T. 50.51.
अङ्ग The wikaraha before ]uh affixes,
substituted for the affix cvi ( वि )
in the case of the roots mentioned
by Panini in Sitras III.1.52-59:(2)
the Wikaranapratyaya in Vedic
Literature before the benedictive
affixes prescribed by Panini in Sitra
III. 186: (3) krt affix in the
feminine gender showing verbal
activity applied to roots marked
' with the mute letter ， and the
roots भिद्, छिद् and others. P. III. 3
104-106.e.g. जेरा, त्रपा, भिदा, छिद etc.
अडित् not marked with the mute
letter ? ( ड् ) signifying the absence
of the prohibition of the gupa or
the wrddhi substitute. cf अडिति
गुणप्रतिषेधः ( वक्तव्यः ) M. Bh. III. 383
Vart. 2. In the case of the preposi-
tion ， ( अा ) unmarked with fa (ड् ),
it signifies a sentence or remembr-
ance ofsomething cf. वाक्यस्मरणयोराडत्
e.g. अ， एवं नु मन्यसे, आ एवं किल तत् cf.
M. Bh. om I. l*14.
7
अचिकित्स्य
~4"
अज्ञ (l) the crude base of a noun or
a verb to which affixes are added;
a technical term in Panini's
grammar for the crude base after
which an affix is prescribed e. g.
उपगु in औपगव,or इ in करिष्यति etc. cf.
यस्मात् प्रत्ययविधिस्तदादि प्रत्ययेSङ्गम् P.I.4*13;
(2) subordinate part, constituent
part cf. पराङ्गवद् in सुवानान्त्रत पराङ्गवत्स्वर
P. II. 1. 2, also विध्यङ्गभूतानां परिभाषाणां
Par. Selk. Par. 93*10: (3) auxiliary
for an operation, e. g. अन्तरङ्ग, बहुरङ्ग
etc. cf. अन्नाङ्गश्ाब्देन इाब्दरूपं निमित्तमव गृह्यत
Par. Sek. Par. 50; (4) element of a
word or of an expression cf.
अङ्गव्यवायै चङ्कपर: R. T. 190, अङ्ग च
क्रमड्यादौ R.T. 127. ब्यञ्जनं स्वराङ्गम् T.
Pr. 211.
अर्ज् considered as auxiliary or part
9 another e. g.पूर्वाङ्गवद्भावः, पराङ्गवद्भाव:;
cf सुबामन्त्रिते पराङ्गवत्स्वर P. II. 12 and
the Vartika thereon * परमपि
च्छन्दसि पूर्वस्याङ्गवद् भवतीति वक्तव्यम्."
अङ्गवृत्तं an operation prescribed in
the section named afigadhikara,:
comprising the fourth quarter of
the sixth book and the whole of the
seventh book of Panini.
अङ्गाधिकार a large section of Paninis
Asidhyay covering five quarters
(VI. 41 to the end of VII) in
which the various operations
undergone by crude bases before
various affixes etc. are prescribed.
अङ्गुल्यादिगण class of words headed
by अङ्गुलि to which the tad. afix ठक्
( इक्र ) is added in the sense of
comparison ( इवार्थे ): e. g. अङ्गुळीव
अाड्गुलेक: cf. Ks. on P. V. 3. 108.
अच् the short term or pratyahra in
Paini's Grammar representing a
vowel, e.g. अजन्त (ending with a
vowcl), अच्सेधि (vowclcoalescence or
combination).
अचिकित्स्य impossible to amend, not
to be discussed. cf. एवं व *पूजिती य:

अजाादगण 8
सुरेरपि' इति अचिकित्स्यः अपच्चंद:: Pada-
mafijar on P. II. 2'12.
अजोदगण class of words headed by अञ्ज
to which the fem.affix अा is added,
somettimes inspite of the affix
ई being applicable by other rules
such as जीतर्ख्त्रीविघयातo P. IV,
1,63 and other rules in the
section. e. अञ्ज, एडक्रा: त्रिफळां,
उष्णिहृा, जेठा, दंष्ट्र. cf P. IV. 1. 4.
अजितसेन author of thc Cfrtndrti-
brd?&ik a gloss on Cºntind,}, the
well known commentary by Yaksa-
varman on the Sabdinissana of
Sakatyana. Ajitasena was thc
grand pupil of Abhayadeva ; he
lived in the 12th century A.D.
आर्जरादिंगण class o[ wordsheaded by
the word अजिर which do not allow
lengthening of the final vowel by
P. VI. 3 I 19. although they form
technical terms e. g. अजिरवती, पुलिन-
वती etc. cf. Ks on P. VI, 3. 1 19.
अज्भक्ति See under स्वर्भक्ति.
अञ्चु (1) tad. affix a ( अ ) with the
mute letter f ( ऊ ), prescribed (i)
after the words उत्स and others in
various senses like progeny, dyed
in, produced in, come from ctc.P.
IV 1，86, (ii) after the words विद and
others in the sense of grandson
and other descendents.P. IV.1.104.
For other cases see P. IV. I. 141,
161; IV. 2.12, 14 etc. IW. 3.7 etc.
TV. 4.49. The feminine is forrncd
by adding i ( ई ) to words ending
with this affix अन, which have the
vrddhi vowel substituted for thcir
initial vowel which gets the acute
. accent also e.g. ओत्सः, औत्सी,ओदपानः,
वेदः, वेदी.
अट् (I) token term standing for vowels
and semi-vowels excepting } ( ल )
specially mentioned as not intcr-
fering with the substitution of ?
8.
अप
_K
( ण् ) for t ( न् ) e.g. गिरिणा, अपेण,
खर्वेण ctc. Sec P. VIII. 42: (2) aug-
ment o (अद्) with an acutc acccnt,
which is prefixed to verbal forms in
the imperfect and the aorist tenscs
and the conditional mood. c.g.
अभवत्, अभूत्, अभविष्यत् Scc P.IV.4.71:
(3) augment < ( अट् ) prescribed in
the case of the roots रुद्, रूप् etc.
before a Sirvadhttuka affix begin-
ning with any consonant except y
( ख ), c.g. अरीदत्, अस्वपत्, अञ्जक्षत्, आदत्
ctc.: sec P. VII.3, 99, 100:(4) aug-
mcnt d ( अट् ) prefixcd sometimes
in Wediic [itc:ature to affixcs of
the Vcdic subjunctive (ठट ) c.g.
तारि्त्, मन्दिपत् 6tc. sec P. III. 494.
अठच् tad. affix अठ prescribed afcr
the word क्रन् ?y the rulc कर्मणि घटेीs
टच् cf कर्मणि धटते क्रर्मट: पुरुः K. on
p. W. 2. 35.
अडच्य् tad. affix अड applicd in the
sense of pitiable or poor to a
word precedcd by the word उप
when the wholc word after उप is
droPpcd, c. g उपड ( उपेन्द्रद्याः + अद्य )
see. p. V. 3. 80.
अ" (I) tokcn tcrnm ( प्रयद्वर् ) f)r :al
vowcls and scmivowcls which,
when Prescribed for an operation,
include all such of thcir sub-divi-
sions.as are caused by 1cngth, pro-
traction accent or nasalization.
cf अणुदित्सवर्णस्य चाप्रत्ययः P. I. 1.60;(2)
tokcn term for the vowels अ, ई
and ऊ in.all Painini's rules except
in thc पुle - I. 09 given above c..
see दृधे पूर्वस्य दध:: P. VI. 8.
l ll, के5: P. VII. 4. 18. and √:
प्र्रुय. P. VIII. 4. 57: (8) ad,
affix.* ( अ ) prescribcd generally
in the various scnscs such as
the offspring, *dycd in,' *bclong-
ing to ' ctc. cxcept in cascs whcre
otherspecificaffixes are prescribedt
cf प्राग्दीव्यतोण् P. IV. 1.83; (4) k.

अणाद
9
अतसुच्
affix a ( अ ), applied, in the
sense of an agent, to a root with
an antecedent word (उपपद) stand-
ing as its object. e. g. कुम्मकार:, see
P.III. 2.1: काण्डलाव:, see P.III.3.12.
अणादि-a term applied to all taddhita
suffixes collectively as they begin
with अण् cf. P. IV. 1. 83.
अणु the minimum standard of the
guantity of sound, which is not
perceived by the senses, being
equal to onefourth of a Matri; cf.
अणेस्तु तत्प्रमाणं स्यात् मात्रा तु चतुराणवात्| see
T. Pr. 2I. 3, V. Pr. 1. 60, A. Pr.
III. 66. Rk. tantra, however, defi-
nes अणु as half-a-matr. cf. अर्धमणु
( R.T. 1.41 ).
अणुदेच्छाख- the rule prescribing
cognateness (सावप्ये) of letters. The
term refers to Panini's sutra
अणुदित्सवर्णस्य चाप्रत्ययः P. I. 1. 69. The
terms ग्रहृणक्रद्दास्त्र and सवर्णशाख्न are used
in the same sense.
अण्णैयाचार्य author of लिङ्गनिर्णयभूषण,
who was a Tamil Brahmana by
caste_
अत्(1) tech. term in Panini's grammar
for short अ, cf तपरस्तत्कालस्य P. I. 1.
70; अदङ्क गुण: P. I. 1. 2; (2)
personal ending अ for इ ( इट् ) of
the Ist pers. sing. Atm. in the
Potential, P III. 4. 106; '(3) case-
affix in the case of युष्मद् and
अस्मद् for abl. sing. and pl. P. VII.
1.3I, 32: (4) tad-affix अत् (अ)
prescribed after क्रिम् in the sense
of the loc. case before which क्रिम्
is changed to कु, क being the
tad. formation; cf. P. V. 3.12 and
VII.2.105:(5) substitute अत्(इतृ) for
लद् forming the present and future
participles in the Parasmaipada.
active voice cf. लटः शतृशानचौ o P.III.
2.124 and दृटः सद्वा P. III. 3.14.
3
अतङ्क non-Atmanepadin verbal affixes
ति, त:...मस्, P. III.4.78, Can. I.4.I I,
Sak. 1.4.101.
अतत्काळ not taking that much time
only which is shown by the letter
(vowel) uttered, but twice or
thrice, as required by its long or
protracted utterance ; the expres-
sion is used in connection with
vowels in Paninis alphabet, which,
when used in Panini's rules, ex-
cept when prescribed or followed
by the letter त्, includes their long,
protracted and nasalized utter-
ances: cf. अणुदित्सवर्णस्य चाप्रत्ययः I.1. 69.
अतदनुबन्धक not having the same
mute significatory letter, but
hawing one or two additional ones,
cf. तद्नुबन्धकग्रहणे नातदनुबन्धकस्य ग्रहृणम्
(Par. Sck. Pari. 84.)
अतद्धित an affix which is not a tad-
dhita affix. cf. लढाकतद्धिते P.1.3.8;
M. Bh. I.3.4, W.3.1 etc.
अत्तन्त्र implying no specific purpose:
not intended to teach anything,
अविवक्षित: e.g. हृरूवग्रहृणमतन्त्रम् Ka!. and
Si. Kau. on तस्यादेत उदात्तमधेंड्रुवम्
P.1.2.32: cf. also अतन्त्रं तरनिर्द्:
( the use of तरप् does not neces-
sarily convey the sense of the
comparative degree in Paninis
rules) M. Bh. on P. I.2.38. This
statement has been given as a
distinct Paribh∂ by Vyadi and
Skayana. The author of the
Mahabhasya appears to have quo-
ted it from the writings of Vyadi
and the earlier grammarians See
also M. Bh. on अल्पाच्तरम् P. II.2.34.
अतसुच् ( अतस् ) tad. aff. अतस् applied
tcthe words दक्षिण, उत्तर, पर and
अबर:e.g.दक्षिणते वसति; उत्तरत आगत:, परती
रमणीयम्, परस्ताद्रमणीयम् , अवरत _आगत:
अवरस्ताद्वसति. cf. P. V. 2. 28, 29.

अतादृग्यादेश
अतादूप्यातिदेइ conveyance of only the
properties of one to another without
conveying the actual form, des-
, cribed as the significance of an-
tdivadbhva. cf. न बा अतादूयाति-
देशात् M. Bh. on P. VI.1.85 Vart.
26. See तादूप्यातदेज्ञा below.
अत[म् personal affix of the third pers.
pl. Atm. in the Imperative (लेट्). cf.
P. III. 4. 90.
अतिक्रम passing over a word in the
क्रमपाठ without repeating it; passing
beyond, cf. अतिक्रम्य परिग्रहृ: R. Pr.
K.7, which means catching a
word for repetition by coming
back after passing over it, e. g.
इन्द्राग्नी अपात् ， इन्द्राग्नी इति इन्द्राग्नी ' or
अनु दक्षि • दक्षि दावने | दक्षीति दक्षि !
अतिजगती one of the varieties of-in
fact, the first variety of-the Atic-
chandas metre, which see above:
this Atijagati consists of 52 sylla-
bles.. e. g. तमिन्द्र जेहृवीमि मघवानमुग्रम्
Rk. Samh.8.97.13 cf, प्रथमातिजगत्यासां
सा द्विपञ्चाशदक्षरा R. Pr. XVI.80.
अतिंद्रा extended application; trans-
fer or conveyance or application
of the character or gualities or
attributes of one thing to another.
Atidesa in Sanskrit grammar is a
very common feature prescribed
by Panini generally by affixing
the tad. affix मत् or वत् to the word
whose attributes are conveyed to
another. e. g. लेटे लङ्कवत् P. III.
4.85. In some cases the atidesa
is noticed even without the affix
मतृ orवत्: e.g.गाङ्कुटादिभ्योञ्णिन् डित् P.
1.2.1 . Atidesa is generally secnin
all grammatical terms which end
with * vadbhava ' e. g. स्थानिवद्भाव
(P. I.1.56-59), सन्वद्भाव (P.VII.4.93),
अन्तुादिवद्भाव (P. VI. 1.85), अभूततद्भवं
(P.IV.60) and others. Out ofthese
atideSas, the स्थानिवद्भाव is the most
10
अतिानवृत्
important onc, by virtue of which
sometimes thcre is a full rcpre-
sentation i. c. substitution of
the original form called sthanin
in the place of the secondary
form called dcSa. This full
representation is called रूपातिदेद as
different from the usual onc which
is called कार्यातिदेदा, cf. M. Bh.
VIII.1.90 Vव्रrt. 1 and VIII.1.95.
Vart.3. Regarding the use of अतिदेश्ा
there is laid down a general
dictum सामान्यातिदेशे विशेषानतिदेढ: --
when an operation depending
on the gencral propcrtics of a
thing could be taken by extendcd
application, an operation depend-
ing on special properties should
not be taken by virtue of the
same : e. g. भूतवत् in P. III. 3.132
means as in the case of the genc-
ral past tcnsc and not in the casc
of any special past tcnse like thc
imperfect ( अनद्यतन ) , or the pcrfect
( परोक्ष ). Sce Par. Sck. Pari. 101,
M. Bh. on P. III. 3. 132. Thcre
is also a general dictum अति-
दट्रिक्रमानेत्यम्- whatever is transfcr-
red by an extended application,
need not , be necessarily taken.
See Par. Sck. 93.6 as also M. Bh.
on P.I.1.123 Wirt.4, [.2.1 Virt. 3,
II.3.69 Vrt.2 etc., Kaiya!a on II.
1.2 and VI. 4.22 and Nyisa om P.
1.1.56 and P. I.2.58 Vart. 8. Thc
dictum अातिदे|्किमनत्यम् is given as
a Paribha by Ngca cf Pari.
Sek. 93. 6.
अातेचते ome of thc varictics of Atic-
chandas consisting of 76 syllablcs.
g. g. स हि दृधे न मारुतं तृर्धिष्वाणं: Rk.
Sarhh. I.i27.6.
अतिानेतृत् a varicty of thc Giyatri
metre consisting of 20 syllablcs,
cf. R. Pr. XVI.22,

अतिपति
आतपत्ति absence of any possibility ;
Sec क्रियातिपात. cf. P. III.3.139
Cºn. 1.3.107.
अतिप्रयत्न intense effort; characteri-
stic effort as required for uttering
a vowel with विक्रमस्वरित,
अतिप्रसङ्ग over-application of a de-
finition which is looked upon as
a serious fault: e. g. अतिप्रसङ्गी ऋश्रा-
दिषु P. VI.1.66 Vrt, 3.
अतिबहु too much,rather unnecessary
e. g. इदं चाप्यद्यत्वे अतिबहु क्रियते, M. Bh.
on I.1.38, इदमतिबहु क्रियत M. Bh. on
I.4.63, VI.1.145;T नातिबहु प्रयोक्तव्यम्
M. Bh. on VIII.1.4.
अतिरिक्त surplus, redundant: cf. Nir.
' IV.20; see Kaiyata on M. Bh. V.
1.131.
अतिव्यक्त guite distinct; used with
＾ respect to pronunciation नातिव्यकं
न न्वाव्यक्तमेवं वर्णानुदीरयेत्	cf. T. Pr.
XVII.8. _
अतिव्यस्त guite apart, used with
: respect to lips which are widely
'. apart ( विाश्छष्टो ) in the utterance
. of long अा and ओी: cf. T. Pr.
II. 12, 13.
अतिव्याप्ते the same as अतिप्रसङ्ग, which
* see above. Extensive application
with respect to a rule which
' applies to places where it should
'. not apply. See Par. Sekh on Pari.
: 28, Pari. 85; also Padamaj. on Kव्र5.
-' II. I. 32. _
ओतिले़ाकरी a variety of Aticchandas
metre consisting of 60 syllables.
e. g. सुषुमा यातमद्रिाभ: Rk. Sarhh. I.
137. 1. cf, R. Pr. KVI.82.
आत्राय excess or excellence as shown
by the affixes तर and तम cf. तरतम-
येीश्राात्य V. Pr. V. 2; क्रियाप्रधानमाख्यातं
तस्मादत्थ तर्बुत्पद्यते M. Bh. on VI.
2.139; VIII.1.71 ; (2) desire as
shown by the affix क्यच् in Panini's
grammar; cf. यश्च अतिक्रिय R. T. 126. |
11
अतुस्
अतिशायन excellence, surpassing; the
same as अतिज्ञाय in V. Pr. V. 2 cf.
अतिदायने तमबिष्ठनौ P. V. 3.55, also cf.
भूमानन्दप्रशंसासु नित्ययोगेsतिायन , संसर्गs
स्तिाबवक्षायां भवन्ति मतुबादय: M. Bh. on
V , 2.94, where अतिद्ायंन means
अतिदाय, Patafijali, commenting on
P. V. 3.55 clearly remarks that for
अतिइत्य्, or for अतिशयन, the old
grammarians, out of fancy only,
used the term अतिदायन as it was a
current term in popular usage; cf.
द्याः सूत्रनिबन्धाः क्रियन्ते यावद् ब्रूयात् प्रकर्षे
अतिशय इति तावदतिक्राायन इति M. Bh. on ,
P. V. 3. 55.
आतेस्पर्श excess of contact, which to
a certain extent spoils the pro-
nunciation and leads to.a fault.
' अतिस्पई is the same as दुःस्पर्श, the
' letter ळ being called दुःस्पृष्ट on
account of excess of contact. This
exeess of contact ( अातस्प् ) in the
case of the utterance of the letter र्
results into a fault as it practically
borders on stammering; cf. अतिस्पर्धी
ब्रता च रेपे, R. Pr. XIV. 26.
अतस्वार्य ( अतिल्वार also ) name of the
seventh musical note in the sing-
ing of Saman. cf.कुष्टप्रथमद्वितीयतृतीय-
चतुर्थमन्द्रातिरुवायौ: T. Pr. XXIII. 13.
_ -
| अांतेदृार transfer of a consonant in a
Stobha. See पुष्पसूत्र.
अठ short term used by Panini to sig-
nify together the five affixes क्तवतु,
ड्वतुप्, ड्मतुप् मतुप् and बतुप् ;cf.अत्वसन्तस्य
वंाघाती: P. VI.4.14. A _
अतुल्यबळ not having the same force:
not belonging to the same type
out of the four types of rules vi2.
पर, नित्य, अन्तरङ्ग and अपवाद. cf. अतुल्य-
बलथेः रूपधे न भवतिJainendra Pari. 66.
अनुस् personal ending of perf. 1st
pers. dual. cf. प्रस्मैपदानां णलतुसुस्थलथु-
सुणल्वमाः P. III.4,82.

अतुन्
12
अद्र्शन
अत्ढन् krt affix अत् applied to the root
जू in the sense of past time. cf
जीर्यतेरतृन् P. III.2.104.
अते personal ending of pres. 3rd
per. pl. substituted for इ ( अन्त ),
the अ of इम ( अन्त ) being changed
into ए and न being omitted: see
ज्ञान्त: (P.VII.1.3) अदभ्यस्तात् (P. VII.
1.4) and टित आत्मनेपदानां टेर (P. III.
4.79).
अत्यन्तगति complete contact of the
verbal activity ( क्रिया ); cfP. V.4.4.
अत्यन्तसंयोग constant contact; com-
plete contact, uninterrupted con-
tact. cf. अत्यन्तसंयेग व P. II. 1.29;
II. 3.5.
अत्यन्तापहृव complete or absolute
demial or concealment offacts; cf.
परोक्षे लिट् " अत्यन्तापहृव च " 3.2.115,
Vart, 1.
अत्यय past happening, cf अत्ययो
भूतत्वमर्तिक्रमः | अतीतेनि हिमंीनि निर्हिमम् !
निःशीतम्	K. on P. II. 1.6.
अत्यल्प rather too little, an expres-
sion used by Patafjali idiometi-
cally cf. अत्यल्पमिदमुच्यते M. Bh. on
T. 1.69 etc.
अत्यल्पस्पृष्ट having a very slight con-
tact (with the organ producing
sound),as in the case of the utter-
ance of a vowel.
अत्याटिa variety of Aticchandas metre
consisting of 68 syllables. e. g.
अथा रुचा हरिण्या पुनानः Bk. Safm.
8.111.1.
अत्यादिगण the group of prepositions
headed by अति which are com-
pounded with a noun in the acc.
case ; cf. अत्यादयः क्रान्ताद्यर्थे द्वितीयया
M. Bh. om P. II. 2.18.
अत्युच्चनीच characterized by a sharp
utterance; a name of the grave
accent
अत्युपसंहृत very closely uttered,
uttered with close lips and jaws,
(said in conncction with the
utterancc of the vowel अ ); cf. T.
| Pr II. 12. See अतिसंश्लिष्ट.
अत्व also अच्च change of a vowcl into
short अ.
अत्वत् possessing or having a short अ
vowel in it; archaic form used by
Panini in उपदेशेsत्वत: (P. VII. 2.62)
instead of अद्वत् the correct one cf.
छन्दोवत्सूत्राणि भवन्ति M. Bh. on I. 1. 1
and I. 4. 3.
अथ Undi affix अथ prescribed in
Undi Sutras 393-396 e.g. scc इापथ,
अवभृथ, आवसथ ctc.
अथर्वेप्रातिशाख्य the Pratisakhya work
of the Atharva veda bclievcd to
have been written by Saunaka.
It consists of four Adhyayas and
is also called रौनक्रीया चतुरंध्यांयिका.
अयुच्य् krt. affix अयु with उ acccntcd,
applied to roots markcd by Panini
with the mute syllable दृ in the
sense of verbal activity: c. g. धपधु:
श्वयथु:, cf तीथ्ज्ञ P. III. 3.89.
अथ्स् conjugational affix of perf. 2nd
pers. dual Parasmai. substituted
for the personal cnding थर, cf. P.
III. 4.82.
अद्न्त ending with the short vowel
अ: cf. P. VIII. 4.7: a term appli-
ed to nouns of that kind, and
roots of the tenth conjugation
which are given with the letter
अ at their end which is not lookcd
upon as mute (इत्) c.g. कथ,गण. etc.
Mark also thc root पिच described
by पतञ्जलि as अदन्त cf. पेिधेिरदन्तः M.
Bh. on I.1.56., M. Bh. on II. 4.43.
अदर्शन a term in ancient grammars
and Pratisakhyas meaning non-
appearance of a phonetic mcmber
वर्णस्यादर्शनं लोपः (V. Pr 1. 141),cxplain-
ed as अनुपला?ध by उव्वट. Later on,
the idea of non-appearance came
to be associated with the idea of
expectation and the definition of
-

_K
अदांदं
लेीप given by Panini in the words
अदर्शनं लीप: (as based evidently on
the Pratisºkhya definition) was
explained as non-appearance of
a letter or a group of letters where
it was expected to have been
present. See M. Bh. on I. 1.60
Vart. 4 and Kaiyata thereon.
अदादि name given to the class of
roots belonging to the second
conjugation, as the roots therein
begin with the root अद्. The word
अदिप्रभृति is also used in the same
sense: cf. अदिप्रभृतिभ्य्ः ्पूः p.. II
4.72: cf.also अदानदाद्योरनददेरेव given
by Hemacandra as a Paribhagº
corresponding to the maxim
लुग्विकरणालुग्बिकरणयोरलुग्विकरणस्य Hem.
Pari. 61.
अदि Undi affix अदि e. g, शरद्, दरद् ;
cf. दृदृभसेsद Un. 127;
अदिप्रभृति See अदादि above.
अदुक् aug. अद् added to the word
एकं before the negative particle न:
' e.g. एकान्नविंशति:, एकांलत्रिंदत् cf. P. VI
3.76.
अदृष्ट not seen properly; doubtful; in-
distinct;said with respect to a letter
which is not distinctly deciphered
in the Samhitapatha: e.g. तल:
( R. Sarh. I. 107. 3 ): the last
letter त् of तत् is deciphered in the
Pada-patha which is given as तत्-
न: cf. अदृष्टवणे प्रथमे न्वीदक: स्यात् प्रदर्शक्रः
R. Pr. X. 15.
अदष absence of fault;
of inconvenience.
सेीप्यदेषी भवति often occurs in the
Mahabhasya: cf. MBh. on I. 3.62;
I. 4.108, etc.
substitute for case affixes सु
and अम् added to words ending
with the affixes डतर and डतम and to
the words अन्य, अन्यतर and इतर. cf.
P, VII. 1.25. _
absence
13
The expression )
अद्व्युपसर्ग
अद्यतनी tech. te rm of ancient gram-
marians signifying in general
the present time of the day in
gucstion, the occurrence of the
immediate past or future events in
which is generally expressed
by the aorist (बुड्) or the simple
future ( दृट् ); the other two corres-
ponding tenses imperfect and
first future (viz. लड् and छद्) being
used in connection with past and
future events respectively, provid-
ed the events do not pertain to
that day which is in question; cf.
* वा न्वाद्यतन्याम् ? M.Bh. P.III. 2.102
Vr.6, वादृतन्याम् P, VI.4.114. Vrt.
3; {2) term for the tense showing
immediate past time called ढङ्क
in Panini's grammar e. g. मायेगे
अद्यतनी ' मा कार्षीत् Kat. III. 1.22,
Hem. III. 3.1 1.
अद्रव्यवान् not expressive of any
substance which forms a place of
residence (ofqualities and actions);
cf. तथा ब्याकरणे विप्रतिषिद्धं चानधिकरण-
त्राव ( P. II. 4. 13 ); इत्यद्रव्यवाच्वंति
गम्यते [ M.Bh. on II. 1.1.
अद्वियेनि lit. not made up of two
elements, and hence, produced
with a single effort, an expression
used for simple vowels ( समानाक्षर )
such as अ, इ, उ, ऋ, ल, and simple
consonants क्, ख्, ग् etc. as
distinguished from diphthongs
( सन्ध्यक्षर ) such as ए, ए, ओ, औौ and
comjunct consonants क, धू , etc.
which appear to have been
termed द्वियीनि cf. अपृक्तमेकाक्षरमद्वयीनि
यत् R. Pr. XI.3.
अद्व्युपसगे not preceded by ( two or
more) prepositions i. e. preceded
by only one preposition. cf.
छादेर्धSद्वद्युपसर्गस्य P. WI. 4.96 prescrib-
ing short अ for the long अा of the
root छाद् before the krt. affix घ,
eg. प्रच्छदः. _ • • .. • •

अधक्, 14
अधिकारसूत्र
समासान्ता: P. V. 4.68, whilc on some
अधिक (1) additional or surplus agtः
vity which a rule in grammar
sometimes shows; अधिक: कार: or
अधिकं कार्यम्: cf. M. Bh. on I. 3.I I,
KS. on III. 2.124, Bh. Vr. on
III. 4.72 ; ( 2 ) surplus subject
matter e. g. अथाख्या: समाम्नायाधिक्रा:
प्राग्रिफितात् (V. Pr. I.33.)
अधिकरण (1) support: a grammati-
cal relation of the nature of a
location : place of verbal acti-
vity. cf. अाधारोsधिकरण्मू P. . 4.45;
(2) one of the Six or seven Krakas
or functionaries of verbal activity
shown by the locative case. cf
सप्तम्यधिकरणे च P.II.4.36;(3)substance,
*dravya cf. अनधिकरणवाचि अद्रव्यवान्वि
इति गम्यते M.Bh. on II. 1.1.
अधिकार governing rule consisting of
a word (e.g. प्रत्ययः, घातीः, समासान्त:
etc.) or words (e.g. डयाप्प्रातिपदिकाद्,
संर्वस्यं द्वetc.)which follows or is taken
as understood in every following
rule upto a particular limit. The
meaning of the word अधिक्रार is
discussed at length by Patafijali in
his Mahabhasya on II. 1. 1, where
he has given the difference bet-
ween अाधकारे and परिभाषा: cf. अधिकार:
प्रातयेोगं तस्यानिदेज्ञार्थे इति योगे येगे उपतिष्ठते
परिभाषा पुनरक्रदद्मस्था सती सर्व शास्त्रमभिज्वलयति
प्रदीपवत् | See also Mahabhasya on
I.3.11, I. 4.49 and IV. I.83. The
word or wording which is to
repeat in.the subseguent rules is
believed to be shown by Phini by
characterizing it with a peculiarity
.of utterance known as स्वरितचर or
स्वरितत्वेन उच्चारणम्. Thc word which
is repeated in the following Stras
is stated to be अधेिक्त. The Sabda
, Kaustubha defines adhikra as
एकंत्रोपात्तस्यान्यत्र व्यापार: अधक्रार्: Sab.
Kaus. on P. 1.2.65. Sometimes thc
whole rule is repeated e. g. प्रत्यय:
P, III. 1.1, अङ्गय P, VI. 4.1, |
occasions a part only of it
is scen repcatcd. 'I'hc repeti-
tion goes on upto a particular
limit which is statcd as in
अासद्धवदत्राभात् P. VI. 4.22, प्राग्रीश्वराळि-
पाताः P. I. 4.56. Many timcs thc
limit is not stated by the author of
the Suitras but it is understood by
virtue of a counteracting word
occurring later on. On still othcr
occasions, thc limit is dcfincd by
the ancient traditional intcrpretcrs
by means of a sort of convention
which is called कारि्त्!र्ति्. This
अधिकार or governancc has its in-
fluence of three kinds : ( 1 ) by
being valid or prescnt in all the
rules which come undcr its sphere
of influence, c. g. |्यिाम् or अङ्गस्य;
(2) by showing additional pro-
perties e. g. the word अपादान being
applied to cascs whcrc thcre is
no actual separation as in सांक्रथ-
केभ्यः पाटलिपुत्रका अभिरूपतराः: (3) by
showing additional forcc such as
setting aside evcn subscduent rulcs
if opposing. Thesc three types of
the influencc which a word marked
with रव्ररित and hencc tcrtncd अधक्रार
possesscs are callcd respectivcly
अधिकारगति, अधिक्र क्रार्य and अधिकं कार्.
For details see M.Bh. on H.3.1 I.
This अधिक्रार् or governing rulc
exerts its influence in threc ways:
(1) generally by proceeding ahcad
in subscducnt rules like thc stream
of a rivcr, (2)sometimcs by jumps
like a frog omitting a rule or
more, and (3)rarcly by procccding
backward with a lion's glancc; cf.
सिंहृाबळीकतं चैव मण्डूकप्लुतमेव च ! गड्पप्रध-
, हृबचापि अधिकारास्त्रधा मताः |
अघिकारस्तूत्र a superintending aphori-
sm, which gives no mcaning of itsclf
where it is mentioned, but gives
its meaning in the number of

अधस्पईम्
aphorisms that follow: e. g- the
rules प्रत्यय:, परदव and अाद्युदात्तदच P.
III. !. 1, 2, 3 or सहृ सुपा. P. II.1.4.
अधिस्पर्शीम् incompletely pronounced,
referring to a letter so pronoun-
ced.
अधुना tad. affix applied to the pro-
1oun इदम् which is changed into
इ before the affix and then elided
by P. VI.4.148, or changed into
अ in which case धुना or अधुना could
be looked upon as a tad. affix.
अध्यचसाय determination to begin
an activity with a view to get
the fruit.	cf. य एष मनुष्यः प्रेक्षापूर्वे-
कारी स बुद्धया कंचिदर्थं संपद्यति, संदृष्टे
, प्रार्थना, प्रार्थिते अध्यवसायः, अध्यवसीय आरम्भः,
आरम्भ निात:, निवृत्तैः फलावातिः cf. M.
Bh. on I. 3 14 and I. 4. 32.
अध्यात्मादि name of a class of words
headed by the word अध्यात्मन् to
which the tad. affix ठञ्म् is added
in the sense of * तत्र भवः ' i.e. found
therein, or existing therein. e. g.
आध्यात्मिकम्, आधिदैविकम्, etc.cf M.Bh.
ora TV. 3. 60.
अध्यस्र superimposition : a relation
between a word and its sense ac-
cording to the grammarians; cf.
Vak. Pad. II.240. (2) appendage;
cf. अहुरूवैकपदा अन्ये अध्यासनेक्रपातिन: R.
, Pr. XVII. 43.
अध्यादृरू supplying the necessary ele-
ment. cf. गम्यमानार्थस्य वाक्यस्य स्वरूपेणोपा-
दानं वाक्यस्याध्याहृारः Ks on P. VI. 1.
139., cfalso Nir. I. 1. 13 and M.
Bh. on Siva Sutra l Vrg }4.
अध्ये, अध्येन krt affixes substituted in
the place of तुमु of the infinitive in
Vedic Literature (P. III. 4. 9.),
e. g. पिबध्यैः when अथैनु is substi-
tuted, the initial vowel of the
word becomes उदात्त, e. g. कर्मण्युपा-
* चरध्यै !
15
अन्त
अन्， tad. affix अ ( अन् ) ( 1) added to
the word नांली in the sense of
*dyed in', to form the word नील,cf.
P. IV.2. 2. Vart. 2.: (2) added to
the word अषाढा in the sense of
*produced in cf अषाढा: उपदधाति M.
Bh. on IV. 3. 34 Vºrg. 2; (3) add-
ed after the affix तीय in the same
sense as तथि e. g. द्वितीये भाग:, तृतीये
भाग: cf. पूरणाद् भागे तयादन् P. V. 3.48.
अन substitute for the affix यु ( युच्,
ण्युट् ल्युट्, लुयु, ट्यु, ट् and others of
which only यु femains), cf. युवे-
रनार्क P. VII. 1. I. e. g. कारणा, हृारणा,
क्ररणम्, हृरणम्, नन्दनः, सायंतनम् etc.
अनड् (l) substitute अन् as Samasanta
at the end of a Bahuvrihi comp.
in the feminine for the last letter of
the word ऊधस् and for that of घनुस्
in all genders e.g. कुण्डीनी (by apply-
ing ई to कुण्डधन्), इांङ्गधन्वा, अधिज्यधन्वा ;
cf. P V. 4. 131, 132; (2) substitute
अन् for the last letter of the words
अस्थि, दधि etc. before the affixes of
the instrumental and the follow-
ing cases beginning with a vowel
e. g. अस्था, दना, अक्ष्णा etc. cf. P. VII..
I. 75; (3) substitute अन् for the
last letter of the word साख्न, of
words ending in ऋ,as also of उदानस्
and others before the nominative
sing. affix सु. e. g. सखा, क्रतौ, उद्दना
cf. P. VII. 1. 93, 94. ,***
अनच्क्र possessing no अच् or vowel in
it. cf इन्द्र द्वौ अचौ, एको यस्येतिलेपनापहृती-
Sपर एकादेशेन ततः अनच्कः इन्द्रशब्दः संपन्नः
cf. Par. Sek. on Par. 52.: M.Bh.
on I. 4.2 Vart. 22.
अनञ् a word without the negative
particle ( नञ् ) before it, e. g. धनु-
रनञ्जि कमुत्पादयति, a sutra in Apisalis
grammar guoted in M. Bh. on
IV.2.45 see also P. II. 1. 60, VII.
1. 37.
अन्त uncerebralized; not changed
into a cerebral ( मूर्धन्य ) Hetter.cf.

अनतिदिष्ट
दन्त्यस्य मूर्धन्यापातर्नति: Uvata on R.
Pr. IV.34. -
अनातिदिष्ट not resulting from any ex-
tended application or अतिदेद, cf.
प्रकृत्याश्रयं अनतिदिष्टं भवति M.Bh. on IV.
I. 151.
अनत्यन्तगात absence of the verbal
activity in all ways or respects in-
complete activity; e.g. छिलकम् not
completely cut, cf. अनत्यन्तगतौ क्तात्
P. V. 4.4.
अनद्यतन period of time not pertain-
ing to the day in question; used in
connection with past time, to
express which the imperfect is
generally used; also in connection
with the future time, to express
which the first future is
generaily used e g- ह्यः अपचत्, श्वः कर्त
etc. cf. P. III. 2.111, 113; III.
3.15, 135: V. 3.21.
अननुबन्घक without any mute signi-
ficatory letter attached;अननुबन्धकपरि-
भाषा is the short mame given to the
maxim-*अननुबन्धकग्रहणे न सानुबन्धकस्य
ग्रहृणम् * See M.Bh. on I. 3.1: V. 2.9.
There is a reading in the Par. Sek.
निरनुबन्धकग्रह्यणे for अननुबन्धकग्रहृणे, in
which case the परिभाषा is called
निरनुबन्धकपरिभाषा. See Par. Sek. Pari.
81._-
अनन्तर (l) immediate, contiguous
अव्यवहित. cf. हृलेोनन्तराः संयोग: P.1. 1.7,
also गतिरनन्तर: P. VI. 2.49: cf.
अनन्तरं संयेीग: V. Pr. I. 48. : ( 2 )
mearest, as compared with othcrs
of the same type: cf. अथवा
अनन्तरा या प्राप्तिः सा प्रतिपिध्यूत M.Bh. on
|- 1-43; cf. Pari. Sek. अनन्तरस्य
विधिर्वा भवति प्रतिषेधी बा, which means
that a prescriptive or prohibitivc
rule applies to the nearest and not
tothe distant one.Par.Sek. 61,Can.
Par. 30.
आनन्त्य non-final cf. अनन्त्यविकारे अन्त्यस्-
देशस्य when achange does not con-
16
अनभिाहत
cern a final lettcr then it concerns
that which immcdiately precedes
the final, Par. Sck. Pari 95, cf.
aIso M. Bh. VI. I. I3 Vrt 5.
अनन्य not different, the same: cf.
एकदट्राधिकृतमनन्यवत् that which has
got a change regarding one of its
parts is by no means somcthing
else; Par. Sek. Pari. 37.
अनन्यवद्भव being the samc, being
looked upon as not different. See
अनन्य above.
अनभिधान inability to cxpress thc
mcaning desircd. The cxprcssion
न वा अनभिधानाद् frcd ucntly occurs in
the Mahabhsya referring to such
words or phrases as could bc form-
ed by rules ofgrammar or could
be used according to rulcs but,arc
not found in current use recogni2-
cd by lcarncd persons or scholars;
cf. तच्चानभिधानं यत्रारुतं तत्रेध, अन्यत्र तु
यथालक्षणं भवत्यश्च	Padarmaj. on III.
2.1;also cf. अनभिधानाद् व्यधिकरणानां
बहुव्रीहिर्न भविष्यति | यत्र त्वांभधानमस्ति तत्र
वैयधिकरण्येपि भवत्येव समासः, कपेठकाल इति:
Nyāsa on II. 2.24: for examples of
अनभिधान, sec also M.Bh.अभिधानलक्षणाः
कृत्तद्धितसमासाः अनभिधानान्न भविष्यन्ति
M. Bh. on III. 3.19. also on III.
2.1. V- 5, IV. 2.1. Scc K;. on
III, 1.22, III. 3.158.
अनभिनिवृत्त that which is not applicd;
lit- (an operation or vidhi) which
has not taken place or which
has not becn effective: cf. प्रसन्कस्य
अनाभिनिर्वृत्तस्य प्रातर्द्धेन निवृतिः इक्या के
नानभिनिर्वृत्तस्य M. Bh. on I. 1.5: IV.
1.37 Cf also न चानभिान् बहिरङ्गे
अन्तरङ्गं प्राप्नेति तत्र निर्मितमेव बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्गस्य
M.Bh. on VI. 4.22: VIII. 3.15.
अनभिहित not conveyed or expresscd
by anothcr i.e. by any onc' of the
for factors viz.verbal affix, krt
affix,taddhita affix and compound.
The rule अनभिाहृते (P. II. 3.I) and

अनभ्यस्तं
17
अनवगतसंस्कार
the following rules lay down
the different case affixes in the
sense of the different Karakas or
auxiliaries of the verbal activity,
provided they are not shown or
indicated in any one of the above-
mentioned four ways; e. g. see the
acc. case in कटं करोति, the inst, case
in दत्रण लुनाति, the dat. case in देवद-
ताय गां ददाति, the abl. case in ग्रामाद-ि
गच्छात, or the ioc.case in स्थाल्यां पचति.
अनभ्यस्त a wording which does not
contain any reduplicative syllable;
an epithet applied to such roots
as are not to be reduplicated a
second time before affixes of the
perfect, as they are already re-
duplicated; cf. लिटि धातेरनभ्यासस्य P.
VI. 1.8.
अनथक (1) without any signification:lit.
having no meaning of themselves,
i.e.possessing a meaning only when
used in company with other words
or parts of words which bear an
independent sense:(the word is used
generally in connection with pre-
positions);e.g. अधिपरी अनर्थक्रो P.1.4.93,
cf. अनर्थान्तरवाचेिनावनर्थकौ ' धातुनोक्तां क्रिया-
माहृतु:	तदविाज्ञी भवति यथा इङ्क पय: ।
M. Bh. on P. I. 4.93; cf. नं निवेद्धा
उपसग अर्थान्निराहुरिति शाकटायनः Nir. I.
1-3: cf also अनर्थक्रो अनर्थान्तरवान्विने
KS. on I. 4.93, explained as अनर्थौ-
न्तरवाचित्वादनर्थकावित्युक्तम् न त्वर्थाभावादिति
दर्शयति by न्यासक्रार; (2) meaningless,
purposeless: cf. प्रमाणभूत आचार्यो दर्भप-
वित्रपाणि: महृता यत्नेन सूत्रं प्रणयति स्म | तत्राज्ञाक्यं
वणेनाप्यनर्थकेन भावेतुं किं पुनरियता सूत्रणM.Bh.
on I. 1.1, as also सामथ्र्ययेोगान्न हि किंचिदद्-
स्मिन् पद्यामि क्षात्रं यदनर्थकं स्यात् M.Bh. on
P. WI. I 77. See for details M.Bh.
on I. 2.45 Vart. 12: III.1.77 Vrt.
2 and Kaiya:a and Uddyota
thereon; (3) possesscd of no sense
absolutely as some mipatas केचन
निपाताः सार्थक्रा:, केचन च निरर्थक: Uv.
B
on R, Pr. XII. 9; निपातस्यानर्थकस्यापि
प्रातिपदिकत्वम् P. I. 2.45 Vलrt. 12 cf.
also जन्या इति निपातनानर्थक्यं P. IV.
4.82. Vart. 1, एकागारानिपातनानर्थक्यं P.
V. 1.113 Vart. 1, also 114 Vart.1.
अनर्थान्तरम् synonym, synonymous,
conveying no different sense, e g-
सङ्क: समूहृ: समुदाय इत्यनर्थान्तरम् | M.Bh.
on P. V. 1.59; अपि न्व बुद्धिः संप्रत्यय
इत्यनर्थान्तरम् M. Bh. on P. I. 1.56.
अनर्थान्तरवाचिन: not conveying any
different sense, अनर्थान्तरवाचिनौ अनर्थकौ
M.Bh. on I. 4.93.
अनावधि opp. of अल्विधि: an opera-
tion not concerning a single
letter, e.g. स्थानिवदादेन्तsनल्विधौ P. I.
1.56 and M. Bh. thereon: cf.
स्थानिवदादे ह्यवर्णविधौ Kat. Pari. 39.
अनवकाशा having no occasion or scope
of application; used in connection
with a rule the whole of whose
province of application is cowered
by a general rule, and hence which
becomes technically useless, unless
it is allowed to set aside the general
rule: cf. अनवकादा हि विधयेो बाधका भवन्ति-
rules which have no opportunity
of taking effect ( without setting
aside other rules ) supersede those
rules: M.Bh. on V. 4.154, also Par.
Sek. 6n Pari. 64.
अनवकाढत्व absence of any opportunity
of taking effect, scopelessness con-
sidered in the case of a particular
rule, as a criterion for setting aside
that general rule which.deprives it
of that opportunity cf अन्वक्त्वं
निर्वक्राइात्वं वे बाधकत्वे बीजम्. This अन-
वक्राढत्व is slightly different from अप्-
बाद्त्व or particular mention which is
definedusually by the words स्मान्य-
{्ब्रु : | विशेषविधिरपवाद : |
अन्वात्संस्कार् (a word) whose forma*
tion and accents have not been ek-
plained; cf. Nir IV. 1 ; V. 2.

अनवयव 18
अनानुपूर्व्येसंहिता
अनवयच lit. having no parts; impar-
tite; without any concern with the
individual component parts : appli-
cation in totality ; cf. सिद्धं तु धर्मापदाने
अनबयवविज्ञानाद्यथा लैकिकवैदिकेषु P. VI.
1.84Vrt5 and theBhsya thereon;
अस्मिञ्ज दाखे अनवयवेन द्रास्त्रार्थसंप्रत्यय : स्यात् |
a rule in grammar applies to all
cases where its application is possi-
ble: it cannot be said to have its
puorpose served by applying to a
few cases only.
अनवस्था fault of having no end: end-
lessness; cf. एवमप्यनवस्था स्याद्य मूल्य-
कारिणी Kav. Pr.: cf.अवद्यं ह्यनेन अर्थानादि-
दाता केनचिच्छब्देन निर्दढ: कर्तव्यः स्यात् | तस्य
च तावत्केन कुतो चनासौ क्रियत | अथ तस्य
केनचित्कृतस्तस्य केन कृत इत्यनवस्था [ M.
Bh. on II. 1.1.
अनवस्थान indefiniteness: cf. उचनीच- !
स्यानवस्थानात्संज्ञाया अप्रसिद्धि: M. Bh. on |
I. 2.30 Vart ].
अनवस्थित undetermined, indefinite;
See M.Bh. quoted above on अनवस्थान;
cf also आर्धधातुकीयाः सामान्येन भवन्तिं
अनवस्थितेषु प्रत्ययेषु , M. Bh. on I. 1.56;
III. 1.4, VII. 2.10, VII. 4.9. The ]
substitutes caused by an ardhadha-
tuka affix are, in fact, effected by
virtue of the prospective applica् !
tion of the ardhadhatuka affix be-
fore its actual application.
अनर्ह tech. term used by the writers ;
of the Pratisakhya works for fre-
Guentative formations such as रीरिष:,
चकूपत् etc.; cf A. Pr. 4.86.
अनाकङ्क not depending on another
for the completion of its sense: cf.
न यद्यनाकाङ्क्षे P. III.4.23, and Nyāsa
thereon which explains अनाकाङ्क aS
न विद्यत ओकाङ्क्षा अपेक्षा यस्य तस्मिन्. '
अनाक्रति not capable of presenting
(on its mere utterance) any tangible |
form or figure the word is used in
connection with a technical term
(संज्ञा|्द्) which presents its scnse by
a definition actually laid down or
given in the treatise: cf. अनाकृति:
संज्ञा ， अाकृातमन्त: संज्ञिनः M. Bh. on
I. l .1 .
अनाद्ए absence of consideration; dis-
regard: cf. षष्ठी चानादरे P. II. 3.38.
अनादिं non-initial e.g. अनादश्च सुहृद्वचनम्
P. III. 4.102, Vrt. 4: also M. Bh.
on VII. . 3.
अनादिष्ट not replaced as a substitutc;
e. g. यः अनादिष्टादचः पूर्वस्तस्य च प्रति
स्थानिवद्भावः M.Bh. on I. 1.57 Virt. 1,
III. * 2.3 Vart. 2, and VI. 1.12
Vart. 10.
अनादेरा (1) original, not such as is sub-
stituted: e.g. युष्मदस्मदोरनादॅा F.VII.
2.86 (2) absence of statement, अनिं-
दंदा e. g. कर्तरि कृद्वचनमनादे स्त्रार्थविज्ञानात्
P. III. 4.67, Vart. 1: cf the Pari.
अनिर्दिष्टार्थाः प्रत्यया : स्वर्थं भवान्त	Par. Sck.
Pari. 113.
अनानन्तर्ये not a closc relation : dis-
tance: cf. क|्चि संनिपातकृतमनन्न ¶श्र-
कृतमनानन्तेर्थे कश्चिच्च नैव संनिपातकृतं न|प
दास्त्रकृतम् ' M. Bh. on VIII. 3.18.
अनानुपूव्र्यसंहिता that satimhit text
which has an order of words in it,
which is differcnt from what
obtains in the Pada-ptha, amd
which appcars appropriatc accor-
ding to the sense intended in thc
passage. There are thrcc placcs of
such combinations of words which
are not according to the succcssion
of words in the Pada-pfgha, quot-
ed in the R.Pr. शृनश्रि्छपे निदितं सहृख्नात्
Rk. Sarh. V.2.7, नरा च शंसं पूषणमगं-
ह्यम् Rk. Sarh. X. 64.3; नरा च शंसं
देव्यम् Rk. Sarhh. IX. 86. 42. cf. Uत
अनानुपूयेसंदृताः | न तेषां त्रयाणां पदानुपूर्वेण
संहृितास्ति Uvvata on R. Pr. II.78.

अनान्तर्य
19
_K
अनंत्य
अनान्तर्य absence of proximity, ab-
sence of cognateness; cf. इहु तर्हि
खट्ये माल्र्य इति दर्धवचनादकारे न, अना-
न्तर्यादेकारौकारौ न | M. Bh. on Siva
Stitras 3-4.
अनाप्य having or possessing no pya
or object; intransitive (root): cf.
चालद्वाव्दार्थाद् औनाप्याद् युच् Cndra I.2 97
standing for वलन्ब्दार्थाद् अकर्मकाद् युच्
P. III. 2.148.
अनार्ष (1) non-vedic: not proceeding
from any Rsi, or Vedic Seer, cf.
संबुद्धौ शाकल्यस्येतौ अनार्षे P. I. 1.16, also
Kas. on the same: cf. क्रिमिदमुपास्थतं
' नाम ' अनार्षे इतिकरण:M.Bh.on VI.1.129:
(2) pertaining to the Padapatha
which is looked upon as अनार्ष i, e.
not proceeding from any Vedic
Seer; cf. अनार्षे इतिकरणः | सं च द्यक्षर
आद्युदात्तश्च, Uvvata on R. Pr. III . 23;
cf. also A. Pr. III. 1.3.
अनि kt affix in the sense of curse,
e.g. अजीवनिस्ते इाठ भूयात्: cf.आक्रोई नाञ्ज
अनिः P. III. 3.112.' This affix अनि
gets its न् changed into ण् after ऋ
or रेफ of the preceding preposition
as in अप्रयणेि:;cf KaS, on WIII.4.29.
अनिच्चू samsnta affix after the word
घर्म and some other words pre-
scribed by P. V. 4. 124-6, e. g.
कल्याणधर्मा, सुजम्भा, दक्षिणर्मा.
अनिट् (l) not admitting the augment
इट् to be prefixed to it; the term is
strictly to be applied to ºrdhadha-
tuka affixes placed after such roots
as have their vowel characterized
by a grave accent ( अनुदात्तस्वर ); the
term अनिट् being explained as
. अनिडादि qualifying the अार्धधातुक्र affix;
(2) in a secondary way, it has be-
come customary to call such roots
अनिट् asdo not allow the augment
इट् to be prefixed to am rdhadh-
tuka affix placed after them. Such
roots are termed अनुदात्त verily be-
cause they are possessed of an
anudatta vowel. e. g. क्, भ्ठ, ज, गम् ,
हन् etc. as against भु, धू, तृ, ध, ट, वद्,
फळ, न्त्र, etc. which have their
vowel characterized by an acute
( उदात्त ) accent. For a complete list
of such roots see the well-known
stanzas given in the Siddhanta-
kaumud incidentally on अात्मनपदेप्व-
नतः P. VII. 1.5. ऊदूदतैयैतिरुणुझीाङ्कस्नु-
____निहृताः स्मृता: | |ु | इकूपचुमुचि-
रिव्व्व्व्.........घातबी ह्यधिकं शतम् |
as also some lists by ancient gram-
marians given in the Mahabhsya
on एकाच उपदेशेनुदात्तात्. P. VII. 2.10
or in the Kasik on the same rule
P. VII. 2.10.
अनिट्कारिका (1) name given to Stanzas
giving a complete list of such
roots as do not allow the aug-
ment इ ( इट् ) to be prefixed to
an rdhadhtuka affix placed
after them. For such Kriks
see Sid. Kaum. on VII. 1.5 as
also Kasik on VII. 2.10; ( 2 ) a
short treatise enumerating in 11
verses the roots which do not
' admit the augment इट् before the
rdhadhatuka affixes. The work
is anonymous, and not printed so
far, possibly composed by a Jain
writer .The work possibly belongs
to the Katantra system and has got
short glosses called ब्याख्यान, अवचूरि,
विवरण, टीका, टिप्पणीं and the like
which are all anonymous.
अनिट्कारिकाविवरण a short commen-
tary by Ksamimanikya on the
work Anitkarik, which see above.
अनिङ्गघ not separable into two padas
or words by means of avagraha;
cf. संध्य ऊष्माप्यनिङ्गय: R. Pr. V. 41 : cf.
also R. Pr. IX. 25, XIII. 30. See
इङ्कम्य below.
अनित्य (l) not nitya or obligatory
optional; (said of a rule or pari-
[ bhasa whose application is volun-

अनिदंप्रथम
20
tary). Regarding the case and cop
jugational afixes it can be said
that those affixes can, in a way:
be looked upon as nitya or obliga-
tory, as they have to be affixed to
a crude nominal base or a root;
there being a dictum that no crude
base without an affix can be used
as also, no affix alone without a
base can be used. On the other
hand, the taddhita and krt affixes
as also compounds are voluntary
as, instead of them an independent
word or a phrase can be used to
convey the sense For a list of
such nitya affixes see M. Bh. on V.
4.7: (2) the word अनित्य is also
used in the sense of not-nitya, the
word नित्य being taken to mean
कृताकृतप्रसाoccurring before as well as
after another rule has been appli-
ed, the latter being looked upon as
आर्नित्य which does not do so. This
*nityatva has got a number of ex-
ceptions and limitations which are
mentioned in Paribhiss 43-49 in
the Paribhasendusekhara.
अनिर्दप्रथम an underived word: an
ancient term used by writers of
the Pratisºkhyas to signify foriginat'
words which cannot be subjected
to निर्वचन.
अनिपात्य not necessary to be specifi-
cally or implicitly statcd, as it can
be brought about or accomplished
in the usual way: e. g. द्वन्द्वम् | लिङ्गम-
शिष्यं लेौकाश्रयत्वाल्लिङ्गस्य , तत्र नपुंसकत्वमनि-
पात्यम् M. Bh. on VIII. 1.15. See
also M. Bh. on VII. 2.27 and VI.
1.207.
अनिमित्त not serving as a cause, not
possessing a causal relation; e. g.
संनिपातलक्षणे विधिरनिमित्तं तद्विघातस्य Par.
Sek. Pari. 85. See also M. Bh. on
I. 1.39.
अनीयर्
अनियत not subject to any limitation
cf. प्रत्यय येता:, अर्था अयत:, अर्था
निथता:, प्रत्य्था अनयत: M. ];h. on II.
3.50. In the casc of नियमविधि (a rcs-
trictive rule or statemcnt ) a limi-
tation is put on onc or more of the
constitucnt elcments or factors of
that rule, the limitcd clcment bcing
called नियत, the other one being
termcd अनेियन; also sce Kis. on
II. 2. 30.
अनियतपुंस्रक whosc scx-especially
whether it is a malc or a fcmale-is
not dcfinitely known from its mere
sight; small insects which are so.
The tern : in P. IV.1. 131 is
explained in thc Mahibhasya as
क्षुद्रा ना आनेथनका अहृीना बा M. Bh.
on P. I V. 1. 131.
अनिर्दिष्टार्थ whosc scnsc has not bccn
specifically statcd ; the word is
used with rcfcrcncc to such affixcs
as are not prcscribcd In any spcci-
fic sense or scnscs and lncncc as arc
looked upon as possessing thc Scnsc
which thc basc aftcr which thcy
are prescribcd has got: cf. अनिर्दिथ्र्थ:
प्रत्ययाः स्वार्थे भवात-affixcs, to which
no meaning inas bccu assigncd,
convey thc meaning of thc bases to
which thcy arc addcd; cf. Par.
Sek. Pari. 113; cf. also M. Blm. on
III. 2.4, III, 2.67, I II. 3.19, III.
4.9, VI. 1.102.
अनिष्ट an undesircd consccgicncc or
result; cf. अनि ध प्रIाति इच न सिध्यति
M. Bh. on I. 3.1 , also cf. नाfनट1र्या
इास्त्रप्रवृत्तिः M. Bh. on VI. 1.2.
अनिटिज्ञ ignorant or inattentive to
what the Grammarian intends or
desires to say. cf. तश्र सौर्यभगथतैात्कम्-
अनिर्जि वाडव: पठति ' इत्यत एव चतुर्मात्रः
कुत: M. Bh. on VIII. 2.106.
अनीयर् krt affix, termed कृत्य also
forming thc pot. pass. part. of a

21
अनुदात्त
root; cf. तव्यत्तव्यानीयर: P.III.1.96. e.g.
see the forms करणीयं, हृरर्णयं, the mute
र् showing the acute accent on the
penultimate vowel,
अनुकरण (l) imitation; a word utter-
ed in imitation of another; an imi-
tative name: cf. अनुक्ररणे चानितिपरम्
P. I.4.62; अनुकरणं हि कििञ्चदिष्टाप्रतिबद्धेषु
यथा लौकिकवैदिकेषु, Siva sutra 2 Vart 1 ;
cf. also प्रकृतिवद् अनुकरणं भवति an imi-
tative name is like its original Par.
Sek. Pari. 36; also M.Bh. on WIII.
2.46; (2) imitative word, onoma-
topoetic word; cf. एवं ह्याहुः कुक्कुटा:
कुक्कुड् इति , नैवं त आहुः | अनुक्ररणमतरेषाम्
M. Bh. on I.3.48.7cf also दुन्दुभि:
इति शब्दानुकरणम् Nir. IX. 12.
अनुकर्षण dragging (from the preced-
ing rule) to the following rule tak-
ing the previous rule or a part of
it as understood in the following
rule or rules in order; the same as
अनुवृति; cf. अनुकर्षणार्थश्चक्रार: Kas. on II.
4. I8, III. 2.26, VII. 1.48: cf also
the Paribha: चानुकृष्टं नोत्तरत्र-that
which is attracted from a preced-
ing rule by the particle च is not
yalid in the rule that follows; Par.
Sek. Pari. 78.
अनुच्छष्ट attracted from a previous
rule as is frequently dome in Pani-
ni's rules. See the word अनुक्रर्षण
above.
अठक्क not actually stated or expressed
in a rule; cf. चकारोनुक्तसमुच्चयार्थ:
KS. on II. 4.18, III. 2. 26, VII.
1. 48; also cf. Nyasa on P. II. 2.9
अनुक्रम right or regular order in a
Vedic recital, called क्रम. e. g. वायव:
स्थ.
अठक्रमण enumeration (in the right
order as.opposed to ब्युत्क्रम ); e. g.
अथ किमर्थमुत्तरंत्र एवमादि अनुक्रमणं क्रियते
M. Bh. on II. 1. 58; also on IV.
2.70; verbal forms of the root क्रम्
with अनु occur in this sense very
| frequently: e.g. यदित ऊध्र्वं अनुक्रामेष्याम:;
| so also the p. p. p. अनुक्रान्तं occurs
frequently in the same sense.
अनुतन्त्र lit. that which follows Tanfra
i.e.Sastra which means the original
rules ofa Sastra; technical term for
Vartika used by Bhartrhari;cf. सूत्राणां
सानुतन्त्राणां भाष्याणां च प्रणेतृभिःVak. Pad.
I.23, where the word अनुतन्त्र is ex-
plaired as Vartika by the com-
mentator.
अठचतम other tham उत्तम or the first
person: cf. विभाषितं सेोपसर्गमनुत्तमम् P.
VII 1.53 and Kasika thereon.
अनुत्पति non-production of an ele-
ment of a word such as an affix or
an augment or the like; cf. वावचन
चानुत्पत्त्यर्थम् P. III. 1.2 Vart. 7, तत्रेा-
त्पत्तिर्वा प्रसङ्गे यथा ताद्वत P. III. 1. 94
Vart. 2, also कृष्यादिषु चानुत्पातः (णित्वः)
P. III. 1.26, Vart. 3.
अठदत non-udatta, absence of the
acute accent;one of the Bibyapra-
yatnas or external efforts to pro-
duce sound. This sense possibly
refers to a stage or a time when
only one accent, the acute or उदात्त
was recognized just as in English
and other languages at present,
This udatta was given to only one
vowel in a single word (simple or
compound) and all the other
vowels were uttered accentless.i.e.
अनुदात्त. Possibly with this idea.in
view, the standard rule *अनुदात्तं पदम-
क्रवर्जम् * was laid down by Panini.
P. WI. 1.158. As, however, the
syllable, just preceding the accent-
ed ( उदात्त ) syllable, was uttered
with a very low tone, it was call-
ed अनुदात्ततर, while if the syllables
succeeding the accented syllable
showed a gradual fall in case they
happened to be consecutive and
more than two, the syllable suc-
ceeding the उदात्त was given a
mid-way tone, called स्वरित: cf.
*

अनुद्त्तते
22 अनुनाद्
उदात्तादनुदातस्य स्वरित:, Thus, in the
utterance of Vedic hymns the
practice of three tonesउदत, अनुदतं
and स्वरित catne in vogue and
accordingly they are found defined
in all the Prtisakhya.and grammar
works;cf. उच्चैरुदात्त:,नीचैरनुदात्त: समाह्यर:
स्वरित: P. I. 2. 29-31, T.Pr. I. 38-40,
V. Pr. I. 108-110, Amudatta is
defined by the author of the Kasi-
kव्रvrtti as येस्मिन्नुच्चार्यमाणे गात्राणामन्ववरूगीं
नाम ढिथिलीभवने भवति, स्वरस्य मृदुता, कण्ट-
बिबरस्य उरुता च स: अनुदात्तः cf, अन्ववसर्गां
मादेवमुरुता ख्यति नेवैि:क्ररा् इच्द्स्त्र
M. Bh. on I. 2. 29,30. Cf also
उदात्तश्चानुदात्तश्च स्वरितश्च त्रयः स्वराः | अायाम-
विश्रम्भाक्षमैस्त उच्यन्तSक्षराश्रया: | R. Pr.
III. 1. The term anudatta is trans-
lated by the word *grave as oppo-
sed to facute' (udatta,) and *circu-
mflex' (svarita}; (2) a term appli-
ed to such roots as have their
vowel अनुदात्त or grave, the chief
characteristic of such roots being
the mon-admission of the augment
इ before an rdhadhatuka affix
placed after them. ( See अनिट्, ).
अनुदात्ततर guite a low tone, comple-
tely grave: generally applied to
the tone of that grave or anudatta
vowel which is immediately follow-
ed by an acute ( उदात्त ) vowel.
When the three Vedic accents
"were sub-divided into seven tones
wiz. उदक्त, उदात्ततर्, अनुदात्त, अनुदात्ततर,
स्वरित, स्वरितस्थेोदात्त and एकश्रुति corres-
ponding to the seven musical notes,
the अनुदात्ततर was the name given
to the lowest of them all. अनुदात्ततर
was termed सन्नतर also; cf. उदात्तस्वरित-
परस्य सन्नतर: P. I. 2.40; cf. also M, Bh.
on I. 2.33.
अनुदात्ता a term meaning : having a
grave accent,' used by ancient
grammarians.Cf. किामेयमेकश्रुतिरुदात्ता
, उत अनुदात्ता M. Bh.on I. 2.33.
अनुदात्तेत् lit. one whose mute signifi-
catory lettcr is uttered with a grave
acccnt: a term applied to a root
characterized by an indicatory
mute vowel acccntcd grave, the
chief feature of such a root being
that it takes only the Atmanepada
afixes c. g. आरोत, वसेत, etc.; cf.
अनुदात्तङित आत्मनेपदम् P. I. 3.12; such
a root, in forming a derivative
word in thc scnsc of habit, takes
the affix बुद्ध e. g. धर्तनः, वर्धन: ctc.
providcd the root begins with a
consonant; cf. अनुदरीतश्र ढळदे: P.
H[[. 2.149.
अनुद्रान्तेपदेश्ा (a root) pronounccd ori-
ginally i. c. pronounced in the
Dhatupatha with a grave accent;
sec the word अनुदात abovc: cf.
अनुदात्तेपदेछात्रनर्तितनोत्यादीनाभनुनासिक्रलेपे
इळि द्विति P. VI. 4.37. Sce also the
word अनिट् above.
अनुदेशा (1) referencc, mention, state-
ment referring to a prcccding cle-
ment. cf. यथासंख्यमनुदेशः समानाम् P. I.
3.10; cf. आसेद्धवचनात् सिद्धमिति चद् उत्सरी-
लक्षणनामनुदेढ: M. Bh. I.1.57, Vairt. 3.
(2) declaration, prescription : thc
same as अतिदे-ं. cf. स्थान्यादेशपृथक्त्वाद्देहे
स्थानिवद् अनुद्रर्दा गुरुवद् गुरुपुत्रा इति यथा P.
I.1.56 Virt. 1; (3) a grammatical
operation cf. यथासंख्यमनुदेशः समानाम् !
समसंश्रन्धी धिर्यथासैर्यं स्यात् Sid. Kau.
on P.I. 8.10. Scc thc word अमूर्दा
in this sense cf. सेर्यातानामभृद्देशे यथा-
संख्यम् V, Pr. I.143.
अनुनद् a forc-sound : a prcccding
additiomal sound which is looked
upon as a fault: e. g. ड्यामि
whcm pronounccd as अहृयामि. This
sound is uttercd before an initial
sonant consonant. It is also utter-
cd bcfore initial aspirates or vi:arga.
cf. घोषवतामनुनादः पुरस्ताद् आदिस्थानां, क्रियत
धारणं वा ， सेप्मेष्मणांमनुनांदोप्यनाद: R. Pr.
XIV.18,19.

अनुनासिक
23
अनुप्रदान
अनुनासिक (a letter) uttered through
the nose and mouth both, as differ-
ent from anusvara which is uttered
only through the mose. cf. मुखनासिका-
वचनेानुनासिकः P.I.1.8, and M. Bh.
thereon. The anumasika or nasal
letters are thefifth lettersof thefive
classes ( i.e. ड्,इ, णु, न् , म् ) as also
vowels अ, इ, उ and semivowels
when so pronounced, as ordinarily
they are uttered through the
mouth only: ( e.g. औ, अ, etc.
or यंयं, वै, ल्लै etc. in सथ्र्यन्ता, सब्बेत्सरः,
सैल्लीन: etc. ) The अनुनासिक or
nasalized vowels are named रङ्गवर्ण
and they are said to be con-
sisting of three matras. cf. अष्टौ
आद्यानवेसानsप्रग्रह्यान् आचार्या आहुरनुना-
सिकान् स्वरान् | तात्त्रामात्रे इाकला दीयन्ति
R. Pr. I. 63. 64; cf. also अप्रग्रह्याः
समानाक्षराणि अनुनासिकानि एकषाम् T. Pr
KV.6. Trivikrama, a commentator
on the Kat. Stras, explains अनुनासिक
as अनु पश्चात् नासिकास्थानं उच्चारणं एषां
इत्यनुनासिका: | पूर्वं मुखस्थानमुच्चारणं पश्चा-
नासिकास्थानमुच्चांरेणामत्यर्थः | अनुग्रहृणात्केवल-
नासिकास्थानोच्चारणस्य अनुस्वारस्य नेयं संज्ञा !
and remarks further पूर्वाचार्यप्रासद्धसेजे-
यमन्वर्था | Com. by Tr. on Kat. I
1.13. Wowels which are uttered
nasalized by Panini in his works
viz. सूत्रपाठ, धातुपाठ, गणपाठ etc. are
silent ones i. e. they are not actu-
ally found in use. They are put by
him only for the sake of a com-
plete utterance, their nasalized
nature being made out only by
means of traditional convention.
e. g. एध, स्पर्ध etc. cf. उपदेर्दाSजनुनासिक
इत् P. I. 3.2: cf also प्रातज्ञानुनासिक्या:
पाणिनीया: Kas" on I.3.2.
अनुन्यास a commentary on न्यास (काज्ञि-
काविवणरपञ्जिका by जिनेन्द्रबुद्धि). The work
is believed to have been written by
इन्दुमित्र. It is not available at pre-
sent except in the form of refer-
ences to it which are numerous
especially in Siradeva's Paribh∂-
*वvrtti.
अनुपपात discord, absence of validity,
incorrect interpretation; cf.प्रथमानुपप-
तिस्तु M.Bh on I. 4.9.
अनुपपद्यमाना impossibility of being
explained; cf. तत्र सिद्धायां अनुपपद्यमा-
नायां इतरथा उपपादयिषेत्, Nir II.2.
अनुपपन्न impossible to be explained,
not consistent , cf. अथाप्यनुपपन्नार्था
भवन्ति | ओषधे त्रायस्वैनम् | Nir. I.15.
अनुपरिपाद्य (संहिता) the Pada text of
the Vedic Sarhhit.
अनुपसर्जन not subordinated in word-
relation, principal member: cf. अनु-
पसर्जनात् P. IV.I. 14 and M. BHi.
thereon; cf also Par. Sek Pari. 26.
अठमदन an effort outside the mouth
in the production of sound at
the different vocal organs such
as कण्ठ, ताठ etc. which is looked
upon as an external effort or
bahyaprayatna.अनुप्रदान is one of the
three main factors in the produc-
tion of sound which are ( 1 ) स्थान,
( 2 ) करण or आभ्यन्तरप्रयत्न and ( 3 )
अनुप्रदान or बाह्यप्रयत्न; cf. स्थाकरणप्रयत्नभ्येा
वर्णा जायन्ते Can. The commentator
on T. Pr. describes अनुप्रदान as the
मूलकारण or उपादानकारण, the main
cause in the production of articu-
late sound cf. अनुप्रदीयते अनेन वर्णः इति
अनुप्रदानम्: cf also अनुप्रदीयते इत्यनुप्रदानं
प्रयत्न इत्यर्थः; Uvvapa on R. Pr. XIII.
I. Generally two main varieties
of बाह्यप्रयत्न are termed अनुप्रदान which
are mentioned as (i) श्वासानुप्रदान
(emission of breath) and नादानुप्रदान
(resomance), the other varieties of
it such as विवार, संवार, घोष, अधेष,
अल्पप्राण, मह्मप्राण, उदात्त, अनुदात्त and
स्वरित being called merely as
बाह्यप्रयत्न .

अनुप्रयेोग
अनुप्रयोग subsequent utterance lit
post-position as in the case of the
footsकृ, भू and अg in the periphja-
stic perfect forms cf. अम्श्रित्यूयवत् इ5ि
नुपृथगेस्य, P. I. 3. 63; यथाविध्यनुप्रयेोगः
पूर्वस्मिन् III 4. 4.
अनुबन्ध a letter or letters added to a
word before or after it, only to
signify some specific purpose such
as (a) the addition of an afix
(e. g. त्रि, अधुच्, अङ्क etc.) or (b) the
substitution of गुणं, वृद्धि or सैश्रर्तारं
vowel or (c) sometimes their prevcn-
tion. These anubandha letters arc
termed इत् (lit.going or disappear-
ing) by Panini (cf. उपदेशेजनुनासिक
इत् etc. I.3.2 to 9), and they do
not form an essential part of the
word to which they are attachcd,
the word in usage being always
found without the इत् letter. For
technical purposes in grammar,
however, such as आदिकिव or अन्तस्व of
affixes which are characterized
by इत् letters, they are lookcd
upon as essential factors, cf
अनक्रान्ता अनुबन्धाः, एकान्ता:, etc, Par.
Sek. Pari. 4 to 8. Although पाणिनि
has invariably used the term इत्
for अनुबन्ध letters in his Sपेtras,
Patafijali and other reputed writers
on Panini's grammar right on upto
Nagesa of the 18th century have
used the term अनुबन्ध of ancient
grammarians in their writings in
the place of इत्. The term अनुवन्ध
was chosen for mute significatory
letters by ancient grammarians
probably on account of the ana-
logy of the अनुबन्ध्य प्, tied down
at sacrifices to the post and
subsequently slaughtered.
अनुभूतिस्वरूपाचार्य a writer of the
twelfth century who wrote a work
on grammar called सरस्वतं-प्रक्रियां
or सारस्वतप्रक्रिया, He has also written
24
अनुविधि
ध तुपाठ and अख्यातप्रक्रिया. The gram-
mar is a short onc and is studied
in some parts of India.
अनुम् not ailowing the addition of the
augment नुम् (i.e. letter न् ) after
the last vowel; The tcrm is uscd,
in connection with the prcsent part.
affix, by Pihini in his rule ऋदुरनुमे
|्छ ज्ञीद्वi VI. 1 .! 73.
अनुभान inference,	suggestion, cf.
अद्राक्ष्यां क्रिया क्रिि ीभूता दृथितुम् |
ससं नुमनुम्था M. Bh. on I. 8. 1.
अनुलोम in the natural order (opp.
to प्रातः ), cf. तSध:्धयेशुभां: in
R. Pr. II. 8. अनुले|्ध is a term
applicd to Sandhis with a vowcl
first and a consonant afterwards.
अनुलोमसौधे combination according
to the alphabetical ordcr; a kind of
euphonic alteration ( संधि ) wh(:rc
the vowcl comes first. c.g- दृथथाट् +
अक्षिः where ट् is changed to ट्:t:
दर्थं:=य् दथ: cf. R. Pr. II. 8. (Sce
अनुलेम ).
अनुघतेन continuation or rccurrence
of a word from the prcccding to
thc succccding rule; thc samac as
anuy!i; cf. अनुकार्त्ते नाम विधयः | न
चानुवर्तनादेव भवन्ति यां किं तां तां यत्नाद्वन्तीति
M. Bh. on I. ]. 3.
अनुवत्यै to be obscrvcd, to be obcycd:
cf. न लक्षणेन पदकाराः अनुवर्या:	पद्कर्माम
लक्षणमनुवत्र्यम् M. Bh. 6n I 1 I. 1.109.
अढवाद् repetition of a rule already
laid down or ofa statcment alrc:udy
made cf. प्रमाणान्तर्गतस्य अर्थस्य <ादन
संकीर्तनमात्रमनुश्राद्: K;. on II. 4.3.
अनुविधि opcration in conformity with
what is found. Thc cxpression
छन्दनिं दृष्टानुविधिः is often found in thc
Mahabhasya: cf. M. Bh. on t. ] .5,
I. 1.6, I. 1.21, III. I.:), II I. 1.13,
VI. 1.6, VI. 1.77, VI. 1.70, VI.
4.128,VI. 4.141, VIII. 2.108.

अनुवृत्ति
25
अनेकार्थं
अनुवृत्ति repetition or recurrence of a
word from the previous to the sub-
sequent rule or rules, which is
neceslary for the sake ofthe intend-
ed interpretation. The word is of
commron use in books on Paninis
graminar. This recurrence is gene-
rally continuous like the stream of
a river ( गङ्गास्रोतोवत् ); somctimes
however, when it is not requircd in |
an intermediate rule, although it !
proceeds furthcr, it is named
मण्ड्क्रष्टुत्यानुवृति. In rare cases it is
taken backwards in a stra work
from a subsequent rule to a pre-
vious rule when it is called अपक्र.
अनुशासन traditionalinstruction; treat- -
ment ol a topic; e.g. अथ द्वादानुशासनम्
M. Bh. I. 1.1 where the word is
explained as अनुदिप्युत सेर्क्रियते युत्पा-
द्यन्त अनेन इति अनुशासनम्
अठषज्ञ (|) lit.attaching, affixing: aug-
ment, अनुषज्यते असौ अनुषङ्गः; (2)a term
for the nasal letter attached to the
following consonant which is the
last, tused by ancient grammarians;
cf. अव्यात्पूर्वे मस्जेरनुषङ्गसंयेगादिलेपार्थम् cf.
P.I. 1.47 Wart. 2 and M.Bh. there-
on: cf. थफान्तानां चानुषङ्गिणाम् Kat. IV.
1.13._The term अनुषङ्ग is defined in
the katantra grammar as ब्यञ्जनान्न :
अनुषङ्ग=. The term is applied to the
nasal consonant न् preceding the
last k:tter of a noun base or a root
base penultimate nasal of a root
or noun base: Kat. II.1.12.
अनुसंहृार independent mention, a
second time, of a thing already
merationed,for another purpose: cf.
* अलेन्त्यस्य ' इति स्थान विंज्ञातस्यानुसंहृार :
P.I.1.53 Vart. 1.
अनुसंव्रतं according to the Sahhit
tcxt of the Vedas: cf.एतानि नेोहं गच्छति
अधिगीं अनुसंहृतम् Bhartrihari's Maha-
bhasyadipiki p. 9; cf. also lR. Pr.
KT. 31, also XV. 33, where the
4
word is explained as संहिताक्रमण by
Uvata.
अनुस्वार see above under ओ.
अनूत said afterwards, generally in
imitation: cf. अनुक्तवान् अनूचानः | अनु-
क्तभिलेयेवान्यत्र M.Bh. on III. 2.109.
_< -
अनूक्त statement with reference to
what has been already said the
same as anvadesa.
अमूडेइर् statement or mention imme-
diately afterwards; the same as
the word अनुददा used by Panini in
I.3.10, cf. संख्यातानाम्दुरो यथासंख्यम् |
अद्द्रा : पश्चादुद्द: Uvapa on V. Pr.
I. 143.
अनेकशेष having no ckasesa topic in it;
a term applied to the Daiva Gram-
mar which does not discuss the
ekasesa topic to which Panini has
devoted ten rules from I. 2.64
to 73.
अनेक्स्चर having many vowels or
syllables in it; the same as अनक्राच्
of Panini; cf. Hem. III. 4.46
अनेकाक्षर having many syllables in it;
cf. अनेकाक्षरवेस्त्वङ्गाद्यवौ <at. Ii.2.59.
अनेकाच् having many vowels (two or
more) in it; opp. to एकाच् : a term
frequently used in Panini's gram-
mar meaning the same as अनेकखर
or अनेकाक्षर, which see above: cf. P.
VI. 3.42,VI. 4.82
अनेकान्त (1) not forming an integral
part, the same as अनव्यव; cf अन-
क्रान्ताः अनवयवा इत्यर्थः Par. Sek. Pari 4.
(2) absence of any definite view
cf. अनक्रान्तत्वाच | येषां वाप्यारभ्यत'तषामप्यने-
क्रान्तः ) . . मामह्यान उक्थपनम् | ममह्यान इति
च	M. Bh. on VI. I. 7
अनेकार्थ (l) possessed of a plural
sense referring to many things.
cf. अनेकार्थे युष्मदस्मद M. Bh. om P.II.
2. 98 also अनेकार्थाश्रयश्च पुनरक्ष: P. I.
2.64 Vart. 15; (2) posscssed of

अनैकाब्ट् 26 अन्तरङ्ग
many senses, cf. अनेकार्था अपि धातवेी
भवान्त M. Bh, on P.III. 2.48; also
cf. यान्यनेकाथनि एकद्वाब्दानि तान्यतेनु-
क्रमिष्याम: Nir. IV. ! .
अनेकाल् possessed of many ietters;
lit. possessed of not one letter, cf
अनेकाल् शित् सर्वस्य P. I. 1.55.
अनेजन्त not ending in a diphthong:
cf नानुबन्धकृतमनेजन्तत्वम् Par. Sck.
Par, 7
अनेकान्तक undetermined, indefinite
एतद्प्यनैकान्तिकं यदल्पप्राणस्य सर्वेचेस्तन्मह्या-
प्राणस्य सर्वनीचै: M. Bh.on I. 2.30, also
M. Bh. on VI. 1.37: not invar i-
able, cf. अनैकान्तिकं ज्ञापकम् M. Bh.
on VII. 2.102, VIII. 3.34
अनैमित्तिक not possessed of any defi-
mite cause, अनैमिातक्रो ह्यनुबन्धलेाप: M.
Bh. on I. 1.20 also on I. 1.59
and I. 2.64.
अन्त final, phonetically last element
remaining, of course, after the
mute significatory letters have
been dropped. cf. अनुत्तरलक्षणोन्तः M.
Bh. on I. 1.21 Vart, 6.
अन्तकरण lit. bringing about as the
final: an affix (which is generally
put at the end); ancient term for
an affix: cf.एत: कारितं च यक्राराध्दं चान्त-
मू अर्तेः शुद्धं च सकाराादं च	Nir. I.
अन्तःकाये lit. interior operation; am
operation inside a word in its
formation-stage , which naturally
becomes attarafgs as contrasted
with an operation depending on
two complete words after their
formation which is looked upon as
bdh?rc?gaz.
अन्तःपद्म inside a word: explained )
as पृद्रस्य मुये by उक्त्रट: cf. नुश्रान्त:पदडर
V. Pr. IV. 2 cf also अन्तःपदं विवृ¶ः
R. Pr.II. 13.
अन्तःपात insertion of a letter or pho-
metic element such as the letter क्
between ， and a sibilant, or
* the lettcr ट् bctween ग् and a
sibilant: cf. प्रलयङ्कक् स विश्वा, व् ，
मूथिहि: cf. Pan. VIII. 3.28, 29, 30,
31: cf. तSन्त:पाता: अकृतसंहृितानाम् R.
Pr. IV. 20
अन्त: पाद्म inside the foot of a verse
explained as पादस्य रायः by Uvvata;
cf. प्रकृत्याSन्त:पादमूयर्पर. i'. VI.1. ! 13.
अन्त:स्थ, अन्त:स्थ /., also writcn as
अन्तस्थ, अन्तस्था /., scmivowcl; cf.
अथान्तस्थ:	थिति रेिन लेिति ffतं: V. Pr.
VIII. 14-15: cf. चत¶न्त:स्थ: cx-
plained by उव्वट as रूपiiH्मन्तः
मय तिन्तंति अंतःस्थ: R. Pr. I. 9,
also परश्रत्तस्था: T. Pr. I. 8. 'I'!ac
ancient tcrtn appcars to bc अतःस्थ
.f used in thc Prti्khya works.
The word अन्तःस्थानाम् occurs twice
in the Mahibh:ya from which it
cannot bc said whether thc word
there is अन्त:र्थ .. Or अंतःस्था 7.
Thc term अन्तस्थ or अभतर्थ is cx-
plained by the commentators on
Katantra as स्वस्य स्वस्य स्थ|्थ अनेतं
तिष्ठन्तीति |
अन्तर interval bctwccn two phonctic
elcmcnts when they arc uttcrcd
one after anothcr; hiatus, patusc;
वर्णान्तृरं परमाणु, R. T. 3 ; also fर्मे
वर्णयेामेयप्यणुक्रीळाप्थ्यु Vyāsa:ik:; (2)
spacc bctwccn two phouctic elc-
ments, e. g. स्वरान्तर cxplaincd as
स्वरयेरन्तर (betwcen two vowcls) by
Uvvata cf. अन्तस्थान्तरेपछिट्टै थिभा-
षितगुण: Nir x.17.
अन्तरङ्ग a highly tcchnical tcrm in
Panini's grammar applicd in a
variety of ways to rules which
thereby cam superscdc other
rulcs. The term is not uscd
by Pahini himsclf. The Virti-
kakara has uscd the term thrice
( Sec I. 4. 2 Vart.. 8, VI. 1. 106
Vart. 10 and VIII. 2. 6 Vart. 1)
evidently in the sense of *imme-

अन्तरङ्ग
27
अन्तगण
diate', *urgent', *of earlier occur-
rence' or the like The word is
usually explained as a Bahuvrihi
compound meaning * अन्त: अङ्गानि
निमित्तानि यस्य ' (a rule or operation
which has got the causes of its
application within those of another
rule or operation which consequ-
ently is termed बहिरङ्कगा ). अन्तरङ्ग, in
short, is a rule whose causes of
operation occur earlier in the
wording of the form, or in the pro-
cess of formation. As an अन्तरङ्ग
rule occurs to the mind earlier, as
seen above, it is looked upon as
stronger than any other rule, barr-
ing of course अपवाद rules or excep-
tions, if the other rule presents
itselfsimultaneously. The Vartika-
kara, hence, in giving preference to
अन्तरङ्ग rules, uses generally the
wording अन्तरङ्गबलीयस्त्वात् which is
paraphrased by अन्तरङ्गे बहिरङ्गाद् बलीय:
which is looked upon as a pari-
bhsa. Grammarians, succeeding
the Vartikakara, mot only looked
upon the बढिरङ्ग operation as weaker
than अन्तरङ्ग, but they looked upon
it as invalid or invisible before the
अन्तरङ्ग operation had taken place.
They laid down the Paribhasa
असिद्धं बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्ग which has been
thoroughly discussed by Nagesa in
his Paribhisendusekhara. The
अन्तरङ्गत्व is taken in a variety of
ways by Grammarians : (l) having
causes of application within or
before those of another e. g. स्येनः
from the root सिव् (सि + उ +न) where
the यण् substitute for इ is अन्तर be-
ing caused by उ as compared to
guna for उ which is caused by न,
(2) having causes of application
occurring before those of another
in the wording of the form, (3)
having a smaller number of causes,
(4) occurring earlier in the order |
अन्तरङ्गलक्षण characterized by
of scveral operations which take
place in arriving at the complete
form of a word, (5) not having संज्ञा
(technical term) as a cause of its
application, ( 6 ) not depending
upon two words or padas, (7) de-
pending upon a cause or causes of a
general nature (सामान्यापेक्ष) as oppos-
ed to one which depends on causes
of a specific nature ( विंदेषापक्ष ).
अन्तरङ्गपरिभाषा the phrase is used
generally for the परिभाषा " असिद्धं बहि-
रङ्गमन्तरङ्गे ' described above. See the
word अन्तरङ्ग. The परिभाषा has got a
very wide field of application and
is used several times in setting
aside difficulties which present
themselves in the formation of a
word. Like many other paribhass
this paribhis is not a paribha
of universal application.
अन्तरङ्गबलीयस्त्व the strength which
an antdra?ga rule or operation
possesses by virtue of which it
supersedes all other rules or ope-
rations,cxcepting an apavada rule,
when or if they occur simultane-
ously in the formation of a word.
the
nature ofan aularafg.n operation
which gives that rule a special
strength to set aside other rules
occurring together with it.
अन्तरतम very close or very cognate
being characterized (l) by the
same place of utterance, or (2) by
possessing the same sense, or (3) by
possessing the same qualities, or (4)
by possessing the same dimension ;
cf स्थानेन्तरतम: P. I. I.50 and Kas.
thereon अान्तर्य स्थानार्थगुणुप्रमाणतः स्थानतः
दण्डाग्रम् , अर्थतः वतण्डी चांसौ युवतिश्च वातण्डय-
युवतुिः | गुणतः पाक, त्यागः, रागः | प्रमाणतः
अमुष्मं अमूभ्याम् |
अन्तर्गण a group of words mentioned
inside another group of words (गण);

अन्तर्माच
cf. पुषादिदेवाद्यन्तर्गणो गृह्यते, न भ्वाद्विक्रया- |
द्यन्तर्गण्: & on Hi. 1.63; also .
क्राग्वत्र्माद्यन्त: Ks o:a i V.2.1 ] 1.
अन्तर्भीव inclusion of an element (of
sense) in what has been actualiy
assigned. c. g. दद्रुतमुपश्रुतिं ， उपररय-
तीति यावत् , अन्तर्भावितण्यर्थात्र र: S8
on P. I.3.84, अन्तर्भावितण्यर्थं युधि:
सकर्मकः भवति ! राजयुध्वा k om P. ! .
2. 95.
अन्तर्हित separated by a dissimilar
clement: cf. यूनि च|्तं अश्रा: P. V.
4.93 Vrt. 6. ब्यञ्जनन्तिपि उद््या्ः
अनुदात्तः स्वरित्पद्यते T. Pr. ClV. 80;
cf. also R. Pr. IIH.9.
अन्तचङ्कच supposed condition of bc- !
ing at the end obtaincd by the
singlesubstitutc(एक्रद्) for thc final
of the preceding and the initial
of the succeeding word. cf. अतदि-
वच्च i येयमेकादेशः स पूर्वस्यान्तद्वत् परस्थःदिवत्
ख्यत् | Sid. Kau. on अन्तादिवच्च '. VI.
1.84.
अन्तस्थ .f, also अन्तस्थ: serni-vowel;
see under अन्त:रूथ.
अन्तादिवद्भाच condition, attributcd to
a single substitute for the final of
the prcceding and initial of thc
succeeding word, of bcing looked
upon cither as thc final of the ;
precediag word or as thc initial ]
of the succeeding word but ncvcr
as both (the fitial as well as thc
initial) at one and thc same Lirnc;
cf. उभयत आश्रये नान्तादिधातू STr. Pari
39 also M. Bh. on I.2.48.
अन्ताम् affix of the impera. 3rd pers.
plur. Atm., substituted for thc
original affix इ, e. g. एधन्ताम्.
अन्ति afix of the pres. 3rd pers. pl.
Paras, substituted for the original
affix ज्ञि, e. g. कुत्रेन्ति, भधन्ति.
28
अमृतु affix of the impera.3rd pers. pl.
Paras.substituted for the original
affix नि. e.g. भवन्तु, कुर्वन्तु
_ _________
अले afix of the prcs. 3rd peB. pl.
Ann. 84:bstittcd fr the d :ginal
affix इ, c g. , ब¶.
अन्र्तीणः a v C'd with its last go wcl
accc:cd acutc. Roo!s, crud : noun
Bascs and compound words gcnc-
ra!y have their last vowcl : ccent-
cd actc: cf. :ि ( श्री हिर्दकस्य )
अत ऊत: स्वॆंतू 'hi, S l r i-l:
धातं: { *. V. 1.16:2} अ-लं ऋक्षें : यतः
,मः:च ( '.Y !. 1.22:3) अन्तं लं.: |् !
अत्त्य् ( ) fin:al ]ct cr; <:नेत ्:ल्.ऊ ' (2)
final consona::{ o|' c:ach (f t!::: fivc
groups of con:ora t1s which is a
nasal :न्थेःक्रि: }. ''. 17.
अन्यत्चिरत्तं: optionally , lit. in : :nother
xxay: cf. ) ,न्थ्: V. '.''. 5.
अन्यतरस्यास्तां optionaily: lit. in acther
way. 'ing tcram is very Cotthfion in
rules of Pimi, w}:(r(: tl : t('rtns
व atnd ? arc :a!8( used in thc
्
{&+4!
S3 HI SCrasc.
अन्यपदार्थ anothor scnsC, sci18c diff'r-
cnt from What has bccn (:xpresscd!
by the wordi g givc11 ; cf. 3्,{-घ-
पदार्थे '. ] [.2.2; also :्वार्थभधाने
बहुव्री:ि M. }h. on l . ] ..
अन्ययुक्त conncctcd with th(: word अभ्य:
co1:ncct(.d with at.cthcr : c.g :्ये
गवां सिमति ... छत्र टेन्थ्: ! .रi| |
रच:्री. A!.HBh. ()n P.[!.3.22.
' अन्यसदृशाधिकरण an object which is
dificrcnt frora what is meratiortcd,
yct similar to it cf. न्युभ् ，-
धिक्रणे तथा ह्यर्थगति, ' अश्र.माथथ्
ऋणदृढां आनंीते ' न् छे:थ त
भूतिं ， M. lh. on P. II I.1.12
अन्याय irregular; cf. -ंश्रिमां भूमिर्-
|्मा प्रथ्न्याथर्भश्च म-थत: Kas. on
P. VII.3.84.
अन्यार्थ (1) htving another purpose or
signification: cf. अन्यार्थं प्रकृतं अथार्थ
भधfत M. Bh. on l.1.29; (2) anothcr
scnsc which is different frotm what
is expresscd cf. अन्यार्थं बहुव्रीहिः Can.
II.2.46.

अन्योन्यसंश्रय 29
अन्योन्यसंश्रय reciprocally dependent |
and hence serving no purpose; '
same as इतरेतराश्रय which is looked
upon as a fault. cf अन्येन्यसंश्रयं त्वेतत् !
रूीकृत: द्राव्दः दाऊदक्तं च स्त्रीत्वम् M.Bh. on
[V.1.3.
अन्वक्षरसंघ a combination of letters
according to the order of the
letters in the Alphabet; a samdhi
or euphonic combination of a
vowel and a consonant, called
अन्वक्षर-अनुलेमसंधि where a vowel
precedes a consonant; and अन्व- !
क्षरनतिलेमसंधि where a consonant pre-
cedes a vowel, the consonant in
that case being changed into the
third of is class; एष स्य स च स्वराश्च पूर्वे
भवति ब्यञ्जनमुत्तरं यदभ्य: ।तन्वक्षरसेधयेानुलेमाः
प्रातलेमाश्र विपर्यये त एव । R Pr. II.8.9
e. g. एष देव:, स द्व: and others are
instances of अन्चक्षरानुलेसुधि where
विसर्ग after the vowel is dropped;
while हृल्यवाड् अनिः is an instance of
अन्वक्षरप्रातलेमसंधि where the conso-
nant ट् precedes the vowel अ.
अन्वय () construing, construction:
arrangement of words according
to their mutual relationship based |
upon the sense conveyed by them,
इदानां परस्परमथानुगमनम् । (2) gontinu-
ance, continuation;cfवृतघटतैलत्रट इति ;
निषिक्ते घृते तैले वा अन्वयाद्विजिवणे भवति अये
वृतघट:, अयं तैलघट इति M. Bh. on P.II.
I. 1.
अन्वर्थक given in accordance with the
sense; generally applied to a tech-
nical term which is found in ac-
cordance with the sense conveyed
by the constituent parts of it; e. g.
सर्वनामसंज्ञा, cf. महत्याः संज्ञायाः करेण एतत्
प्रयेोजनमन्वर्थसंज्ञा यथा विज्ञायेत M. Bh. on
P. I.1.23.
अन्वर्थसेज्ञा A technical term used in
accordance with the sense of its
constituent parts; e. g. सर्वनाम, संख्या,
अव्यय उपसर्जन,कारक, कर्मप्रवचनीय, अब्ययी-.
अपृ
-&
भाव, प्रत्यय, उपपद् etc. All these terms
are picked up from ancient gram-
narians by Pahimi: cf. तत्र महत्याः संज्ञाया
एतत् प्रयेञ्जनम् | अन्वर्थसंज्ञा यथा विज्ञायेत ?
रंख्यायत अनया संख्यति | cf. M. Bh. on
I.1.23; also cf. M.Bh.on I.1.27,I.
1.38,I.2.43, I.4.83, II.1,5, III. 1.1,
III.1.92 etc.
अन्ववसर्ग relaxation or wide opening
of the sound-producing organs as
done for uttering a vowel of grave
accent. cf. अन्ववंसर्गः गात्राणां विस्तृतता
Tait. Pr. KII.10.
अन्वक्षर्षक a word attracting a previ-
ous word such as the word च, in
the Sutra texts.
अन्वावय aggregation of a secondary
element along with the primary
one: यत्रैकस्य प्राधान्यमितरदप्रधाने तदनुरोध-
नान्वन्चीयमानता अन्वाचय: Nyasa on P.II
2.29. Cne of the four senses of च,
e.g.भिक्षामट गां चानय: cf. प्लक्षश्चेत्युक्ते गम्यत
एतत्ल्क्षेर्थे प्रयुज्यत इति |
_K -
अन्वदंझा (1) lit. reference to the ante-
rior word or expression: cf.अन्वादशेा-
न्त्यस्य (नि:दाच्दस्य in T.Pr.VII.3, अकारस्य
in V-8) T. Pr. I.58: (2) reference
again to what has been stated pre-
viously: cf. इदमोन्वादेशेट्रानुदात्तस्तृतीयादौ
अन्वादेदाश्च कथितानुकथनमात्रम् P..II. 4.32
and Vart. 2 thereon; एकस्यैवाभधेयस्य
पूर्वे द्रादेन प्रतिपादितस्य द्वितीयं प्रतिपादनमन्वा-
देद्दा: Ks on the above.
अन्वादेशक a word capable of attract-
ing a word or words from previous
statements; cf चापीत्यन्वादाक्रो T Pr.
KKII.5; same as अन्वाकर्षक्र.
अप् (I) krt affix अ, in the sense of
verbal activity (भाव) or any verbal
relation (कारक) excepting that of an
agent, (क) applied to roots ending
in ऋ or उ and the rootsग्रहृ,वृ, दृ etc.
mentioned in P. III.3.58 and the
following rules in preference to the
usual affix घन. e. g. कर:, गर:, इारः,
यवः, लव:, पव:, प्रहृ:, स्वन: etc, cf. P.III,

अपकर्षे
30
अपादान
3.57-87 ; (2) compound-ending अम्
applied to Bahuvrihi compounds
in the feminimc gender ending with
a Purana affix as also to lahuvrihi
compounds ending with लेसन्
preceded by अन्त or वह्निर् e. g.
कल्याणीपञ्चमा रात्रयः, अन्तले，मः, बढिलंसः पट: .
cf. P. V. 4.116, 117.
अपकर्ष (1)deterioration of the place or
instrument of the production of
sound resulting in the faulr called
निरस्त: cf. स्थानक्ररणयेारपक्षेण निरस्तं नाम
देष उत्पद्यत, R. Pr. XIV.2; (2) draw-
ing back a word or words from a
succeeding rule of grammar to
the preceding one; cf. "वक्ष्यति तस्याग्रे
पुरस्तादपकर्षः, M. Bh. on II.2.8. (3)
inferiority (in the case of dualities)
न च द्रव्यस्य प्रकर्षापकर्षौ स्तः !
अपत्य a descendent, male or female,
from the son or daughter onwards
पुpt9 anygeneration; cf तस्यापत्यम्
P, IW. 1.92.
अपभ््इ degraded uttcrance of
standard.correct forms or words:
corrupt form: c. g. गावी, गोणी and
the like, of the word गे, cf. ¶.
इल्यस्य द्व्दस्य गुर्वीं गेणीं गेता गे्त्
इलेयवमादयः अपभ्रज्ञा: M. Bh. on . l.l ;
cf इच्दूत्कारीने ये गौरिति प्रयुयुक्तं ;
तुम्दुभिच्छत .विचिथनिंनि V:
Pag I.149: सर्वय् हिं अपभ्रदास्ये साधुर्वे
प्रकृतिः com. on Wak. Pad I. 140.
अपवगे chievement; cf, फलग्राम क्षुत् !
क्षिप्तमूर्तिः अपवर्गः sec K. on अक्ष् ,
तृताया P. II.3.6.
अपवणे a letter which is phonetically
Pady or wrongly pronounced. cf.
कूर्तयद्गतं दग्धमपवर्ण च भक्षितम् | न तस्य काश्च
मेक्षीस्त पापाहेरिव किाचयात् Ph.sk.50.
अपवद् a spccial rule which sets ;
side the general rule: a rule
forming an exception to the gcne- !
ralrulc. e.g. आतोनुपसर्गे कः IIf2. 2 ;
which is an exception of the general ]
rule कर्मण्यण् III. 2. 1; cf. ्् ् ]
ये विधिरारभ्यते स तस्य वार्धकं भवति, तदपवा-
देयं येागे भवति: Pari. Sckh. Par 57;
for details 8ce Par. Sckh. Pari.
57-05: cf न्यायैर्मिश्रानपथादान् प्रतीयात् !
न्याया उत्संगीं: मह्यधियः | अपत्रादा अल्पे-
¶िाः थिधय: | तानुत्संगेण भिश्र्नकीकृताङ्क
जनयत् ' अपवीद्यं मुक्त्वा उत्सर्गाः
प्रवर्तत इत्यर्थ: | R. Pr. I. 23 and
com. thercom ; (2) fault: cf. इस्रा-
पत्रादात् प्रतिपाळुंभदात्... R. Pr. XIV.
30 on which उळ्ट rctmarks इास्त्राणाम-
प्Iदा देयाः सन्ति पुनरुक्तता अविस्पष्टार्थता,
अपवfद्रन्याय thc convcntion that a
rule laying down an exception
superscdcs the general rulc; cf. सिद्ध
त्वप्रवृद्धाश्रन P. [.3.9 Vrt. 7
अपवादबलीयस्त्च the convention that
a Special rule is always stronger
than the gencral rulc.
अपवादविप्रतिषेध a conflict with a spc-
cial rulc, whch thc spccial rule
superscdes thc general rulc: cf.
अलेन्त्यस्य' इति उस्सिर्ग: | तस्य अह्नः परस्य
अ्््' इत्यपवादं अपवादप्रापेधातु
सर्दी भविष्यति | M. jh. on I.1.5
Vrt. ] .
अपवृक्त that which has already
happcricd or taken placc; cf. 1्थाऩा
सेप भूतकाळतां | कुतः ' ओथ्यधर्मानृ | अा-ि
|्त: | uप नाम थाथ्थे भूतकाले थत्र
किंचिदपवृतं दृश्यते M.Bh. on II I.2.102
अपराख्द corrupt form of a correct
word, callcd म्लेच्छ also; cf. मेळ हृ
च U पदेपद: M. Bh. om I. 1.1.
अस्तु धूपिं तर्स्तभ्माद नीथेदं भविष्यति |
च्तये धांचक्श्र्युद्ध्यताम् | M.
Bh. om V. 8. 55.
अपाणिनीय not in conformity with
thc rules of finini's gramtmar; cf.
f्यलेभप[नथं नु भव，ि M. Bh. on
I. I. 1.
अपादान detachment, scparation, abla-
tion technical termfor अपादानकारक
which is defincd as धुवमपायेपादानम्

अपंग्य
3l
अप्रधान
in P. I. 4.24 and subsequent rules
25 to 3l and which is put in the
ablative case : cf. अपादाने पञ्चमीं P.
II. 3.28.
अपाय (1) point of departure, separa-
tion; cf. धुवमपायेपादानम् P. I. 4.24 (2)
disappearance; cf. संनियेागर्दिष्टानामन्यत-
रापाये उभयेरप्यपायः तद्यथा देवदत्तयज्ञदत्ताभ्या-
भिदे कर्म कर्तव्यम् | देवदत्तापाये यज्ञदत्तेपि न
करोति M. Bh. on IV.1.36.
अपार्थक without any purpose or
object, useless; cf. ततोनिष्टादर्शनादपार्थक्र-
मतत् Nyasa on P. I. 4.80.
अपि also in addition to; अपि is used
sometimes to mean absolute of or
ungualified by any condition: cf.
अन्येभ्येपि दृश्यते | अपिइाऋद्: सर्वोपाधिव्यभि-
चेरंार्थ: ， निरुपपदादपि भवति | धीवा पबा !
KS. on P. III. 2.75, III. 2.101,
VII. 1.38; cf. अपिग्रहृणे ब्यभिचारार्थम् )
Durgasirhha on Kat. II. 3. 64.
अपित् not marked with the mute
letter पू, A Sarvadhtuka affix not
marked with mute प् is looked
upon as marked with ड् and hence
it prevents the guna or vrddhi
substitution for the preceding
vowel or for the penultimate vowel
if it be अ. e. g. कुरुत: तनुत:, कुर्वान्ति
where no guna takes place for the
vgwc उ cf सार्वधातुक्रमापत्. P. I. 2.4.
अ'वे (l) not existing before: cf.
आगमश्च नाम अपूर्वः इाब्देपर्जनः M. Bh. on
I. 1-20, I. 1.46; (2) mot preceded by
anyletter or so, cf अपूर्वलक्षण अादिः
M. Bh. on I. 1.21: (3) a rule pres-
cribing something not prescribed
before: cf तत्र अपूर्व विधिरस्तु नियमेोस्तु
इति अपूर्व एव विधिर्भविष्येति न नियमःM.Bh
on I. 4.3., III. 1. 46, III. 2. 127,
TII. 3. 19.
अछत lit. unmixed with any (letter);
a technical term for an affix consist-
ing of one phonetic element, i.e. of
a single letter. cf. अपृक्त एकाल्प्रत्यय:
P. !. 2.41.
अपेक्षा relation of dependance; cf.
अयुक्तैवं बहुनेोपेक्षा M. Bh. on IV. 2.92.
अपीद्धार disintegration of the consti-
tuent elements of a word; analysis;
अपेोद्धारः पृथक्करणम् com. on Vak. Pad.
II. 449: cf. अपेोद्धारपदार्था य य चाथ:
स्थितलक्षणा: Vak. Pad. I.24.
अप्पयदीक्षेत, अप्पदीक्षित A famous ver-
satile writer of the sixteenth cen-
tury A. D. ( 1530-1600 ), son of
रङ्गराजाध्वरीन्द्र a Dravid Brahmana.
He wrote more than 60 smaller
or greater treatises mainly on
Vedanta, Mimrhsव, Dharma and
Alankara Sastras : many of his
works are yet in manuscript form.
The Kaumudi-prakasa and Timan-
tasesasaringraha are the two pro-
minent grammatical works written
by him. Pandit Jagannatha spoke
very despisingly of him.
किव non-retention of the ori-
ginal word accents; cf. तत्र यस्य गतर-
प्रकृतिस्वरत्वं तस्मादन्तेादात्वं प्राप्नेति M. Bh.
on WI.2.49. See the wordप्रकृतिस्वरत्व.
अप्रातिपाति (l) impossibility to obtain
the correct form; (2) absence or
want of apprehension, cf दाब्दानां
त्राप्रतिपतिः प्राप्नोति M. Bh. on I. 1.1,
I. 1. 44 Vart. 8.
अप्रतिषेघ useless prohibition; unneces-
sary prohibition; cf. अनर्थकः प्रतिषेधः
अप्रतिषेध: M. Bh. on I. 1.6: I. I. 20.
I. 1. 22 etc.
अप्रत्यय (1)lit. absence of any affix: an
affix such as क्रिप् or किन् which
wholly vanishes; cf. पिपठिषतेः अप्रत्ययः
पिपठीः M.Bh. on I. 1.6. कण्ड्यतेरप्रत्यय:
अ!
कण्ड्: M. Bh. on I. 1.58; (2) that
which is not an affix. cf. अप्रत्ययस्यैता:
संज्ञा मा भूवन् M. Bh. on I. 1. 61,
I. 1.69; (3) that which is not pre- '
scribed, अभिधीयमान,अप्रत्याय्यमान:MBh.
on I, I. 69. _
अप्रघान ([) non-principal, subordi-
' nate, secondary, cf, अप्रधानमुपसर्जन-

अप्रयुक्तं
मतिं, M. Bh. on i. 2.43; (2) non-
essential, non-predominent, cf.
सहृयुक्तेSश्रधान P. II. 2.19 and the
instance पुत्रेण सहृगतः पिता | Kas. om
II. 2.19.
अप्रयुक्त not found in popular gr cur-
rent use, e.g. the words ऊ, तर, चक्र
etc. यद्यप्यप्रयुक्ता अवइये दीर्घसत्त्रवृक्षेणनानु-
विंधया: M. Bh. on i. 1. l, also
यथालक्षणमत्रयुक्त M. Bh. on I. I. 24
अप्रयेाग (1) non-cmployment of a word
in spite of the meaning being
available: cf. संभावनलमिति सिद्धाप्रयोगे
P. III.3. 154; (2) non-employment
cfउक्ताथानामप्रयेीग: a standard dictum
of grammar not allowing superflu-
ous words which is given in M.B!.
on P.I.1.4 Wart. 10 and statcd in
Candra and other grammars as a
Paribhsa.
अप्रयोगिन् not-found in actual usc
among the people although mcn-
tioned in the Sastra-texts; a mute
indicatory letter or letters. cf.
अप्रयेोगी इत् Sव्रk. I. 1.5 Hem I. 1.37
Jain. I.2.3 and M.Bh. Pradipa om
III. 8. 31.
अप्रसङ्ग non-application of a rule of
grammar or of a technical tcrm;
cf. अन्यत्र सहृवचनात् समुद्र संज्ञाsश्रसङ्कग:M.
Bh. on P. I. 1. l Vart. 11.
अप्रासेद्ध Not well-known: secondary
(used in connection with scnse)
cf.. एवं चाप्रासद्धत्वं गौणलाक्षणिकत्वे चात्र
गौणत्वम् Par. Sek Pari. 15
_X -
अप्रासिद्धि absence of clear sense or
interpretation; cf इतरतराश्रयत्वादप्रसिद्धि:
M. Bh. on I. 1.l. Vart. 8, I. 1. 38 !
Vart. 4.
अप्राप्तविकल्प same as अप्राप्तविभाषा onc of !
32 अभक्त
I. 3. 48. हृक्रोरन्यतरस्याम् | अभिवादयति गुरं
माणवकन पिता , अग्राधिक्त्वामृतीयैव Ks.
on H. 1.53. विभाषा सपूर्वस्व' स्थ्छपति ;
स्थ्छपत्नीं " अञ्जातविभ्यसय्संयेगत्त् !
अप्राप्तांबिधान prescription of a new
thing. cf. तत्र प्रातर्द्धानं ग्रांप्रतिंध: M.
Bh. on VI. 4.17 ] Wirt. 2.
अप्राप्तविंधि prescribing an operation
which otherwisc cannot bc had.
अग्रादेवप्र[भधेि: समसः|्ध: P. III.
4. 24 Virt ] .
अप्राप्तविभाष scc abovc अथाकल्प.
अप्राप्ति ( i ) nou-occurrence for non-
rcalization of a grammatical
opcration or rulc-- अध: M.
Bh. on I. ] 0 Virt. 8; (:) pro-
hibition of thc occurr:ncc (f a
rulc or operation, cf. ःपार्था !
अथवानन्तरा या प्र:ि + प्रतिषिध्यंत M.
Bh. on II I. -3, I. 1. 03.
अप्ठत mon-protractcd vowel cf. अते
रोरप्छनादप्लुते P. VI. 1. 113.
अवाघक not coming in the way of
rules othcrwisc applicable: .thc
word is used in conncctiont with
निपातन i. c. constitutcd or announc-
cd forms or spccially frncd
words which are said to bc अथIध
i. c. not coming in the way of
forms which could bc arrive:d at
by application of the regular rulcs.
Siradcva has laid down thc P:ari-
bhas अबधक्रान्थपि निपातनम् भवति
defending the form पुरातन in spitc
of Pujimi's spccific mcntion of thc
word पुराण in thc rule पुराणप्रेकेषुo
IV. 3. 105.
| अभक्त 1uot-forming an integral part
of another quitc independent
the three kinds of optional appli- ( uscd in conicction with aug-
cation of a rule; cf. त्रिसंदायास्तु भवन्ति ] rmcnts ). cf. किं पुनरयं पूर्वान्त अा:्थत्
प्रांत अप्राप्ते उभयत्र वति	M. Bh,on P. !
I. 1.44 Vart.. 20; optional appli-
cation of a rule prescribing an
परादिराईस्रिधद् अमक्रा: M. IBh. on I. I.
| 47, 1.1.51. एवं राहुभक्तः करिष्यते M.
| Bh on VI.1.71, VI. 1.135, and
operation; e.g. ऊर्णोतेर्विभाषा, अनुपसर्गाद्वा | VII. 2.82.

अभयचन्द्र
33
अभिनिधान
अभयचन्द्र a Jain grammarian ， who
wrote प्रक्रियासंप्रहृ, based on the Sabdर्त-
nussana Vyakarana of the Jain
Sakatyana.His possible date is the
twelfth century A. D.
अभ्यतिळक a Jain writer of the
thirteenth century who wrote a
commentary on the SabdanuS3-
sana Grammar of Hemacandra.
अभयनन्दन् a reputed jain Gramma-
rian of the eighth century who
wrote an extensive gloss on the
जेनेन्द्रव्याकरण. The gloss is known as
जैनेन्द्रव्याकरणमह्यावृत्ति of which वृहृञ्जने-
न्द्रव्याकरण appears to be another
r1ame
अभाव absence; absence of any
following letter which is technically
called avasana. cf. विरसौSवसानम् !
वर्णीनामभावोSवसानसंज्ञः स्यात् S. K. on P.
I. 4.110.
अभाषितपुंस्क that which does not
convey a masculine sense ; a word
which is not declined in the
masculine gender: a word possess-
ing only the feminine gender e.g-
ख्दू, लतां etc.cf. अभाषितपुंस्काच P. VHI.
3. 48.
अभिछति a variety of long metres
called अतिच्छन्दस् it consists of 100
syllables. cf. '' अभिकृति:-दवा अह्निः
स्विष्टकृत् R. Pr. XVI. 60.
अभिक्रम the first of the two utter-
ances of a word which chara-
cterise the krama method of
recital: e. g in the krama recital
ofप्रण इन्दे etc. प्र णः । न इन्दे l the first
recial प्र णः is called अभिक्रस, or प्रथम-
वचन while न इन्दे is called द्वितीयवचनः
cf. अभिक्रम पूर्वविधानमाचरेत् पुनबुवंस्तूत्तरकारितं
क्रमे R. Pr. XI.21.
अभिघात depression or sinking of
the voice as required for the
utterance of a circumflex vowel.
5
अभिधान designation, denotation, ex-
pression of sense by a word which
is looked upon as the very mature
of a word. The expression अभिधानं
पुनः स्वाभाविक्रम् ( denotation of sense
is only a natural characteristic of
a word ) frequently occurs in the
Mahabhasya ; cf. M. Bh. on 1.2.64
Vart 93, II. 1.1, cf. नपुसकं यदूष्मान्तं
तस्य बहुाभधानज: ( R. Pr. XIII.7 )
where the word बहुभिधान means
बहुव्वन.
अभिधेय object or thing denoted by
a word , sense of a word; cf. अभि-
ध्यवाञ्छङ्कगवचनानि भवन्ति M. Bh. on
II. 2. 29.
अभिनिध्यान lit. that which is placed
near or before; the first of
the doubled class consonants ;
a mute or sparsa conso-
nant arising from doubling and
insertcd before a rnute; cf. अचेा-
बादूष्मणः परः प्रथमः अभिनिधानः स्पर्दीपरात्तस्य
सस्थोन: ( T. Pr. XIV. 9. ) explain-
ed by त्रिभाष्यरत्न as स्पर्शपरादधेाषीदूमण:
पर: प्रथम आगमस्तस्य स्पर्शस्य समानस्थान:
अभिनिधाने भवति | अाभ्नधीयत इत्यभि-
निधान: आरोपणीयः इत्यर्थः | यथा य: क्क्रामयेत
अदम्मकूर्जम् | यः पाप्मना | The Rk.
Pratikhya explains the term
अभिनिधान somewhat differently; cf.
अभिनिधानं कृतसेर्हितानां रूपन्ति:स्थानामषवाद्य
रेफम् ! संघारणं सेसिरणं श्रुतेश्च स्पर्शौदयानामपि
चावसांन R. Pr. VI. 5, explained by
उच्चट as स्पर्शपराणां स्पन्दानां श्रेष्ठं वर्जयित्वा
अन्तःस्थानां च वर्णानां कुतसंहितानां च सतां
संधारणं वर्णश्रुतेश्च संवरणं भवति | तदतद् आभ-
निधानं नाम , यथा उप मा षड् द्वा द्वा ' ऋ.
सं <द् < % इहृ षड् इत्यत्र अाभ्नधानम् |
अभिनिघान possibly according to
उव्वट here means the first of the
doubled letter which, although the
second letter is attached to it, is
separately uttered with a slight
pause after it. अभिनिधानं means, in
short, something like 'suppression.'

अभिनिवृत
34
____ अभेदान्वय
The Rk. Tantra takes a still wider
view and cxplains अभिनिधान as the |
first of a doubled goisonant, cf ;
अभिनिधान: । क्रमजं च पूर्वान्ततस्वरं भवति | |
R. T. 21.
अभिनिवृत development of an acti-
vity manifestation cf ठेषु कर्म-
चेदिंनायां द्वयेरेकस्याभनितिर्भवति M. }h. !
on VI. 1.84.
अभिनिविष्ट hat which has already
entered on functioning or begu n to
function: cf. अभबत एतेषां शब्दानां
एतप्वथेषु अभिनिधिदृानां निमित्तत्वेन अन्वाख्यानं ;
क्रियत M. Bh. on II. 1.1. cf. पूर्वमपवाद
अभिनिादत्ते पश्चादुत्सर्गः, M. Bh. on
II. 3.46: Pari. Sek. Pari. 02.
अभिनटान Resonance (of a visarga
utterance). -
|
अभिनिहित used in connection with
a सन्धि or euphonic combination )
in which the vowel अ, as a first or :
a second member, is absorbed ]
into the other mctmber. e. g. रथेभ्यः
4 अन = रथेभ्येS also दाशुषेSने, whcrc |
अ of अजे is absorbcd or mcrged in
ओ of थेभ्यः or ए of दायु: cf. अथा- !
भिान्त: संधिरेतैः प्राकृतवैकृतैः | एवंीभवति ;
पादादिरकाररस्तेत्र संधिजः; R. Pr. II. 13 }
to25: cf.एङः पदान्तादति P. VI. 1. 109. !
अभिनिहृतस्चर namc given to the
circumflex vowel which is the ;
resultant of the अfभानोतध.
अभिप्राय (1) अभिप्रायसंध a kind of
euphonic combination where the ;
nasal letter न is dropped and the ;
preceding vowel ( अ ) is nasa-
lised e. g, दधन्वां थः | स्ववाँ यातु	:
(2) view, purpose, intention; cf. !
तद् व्यक्तमाचार्यस्याभप्रायं गम्येत, इदं न !
भवतीति: M. Bh. on I.1.27; cf. also !
स्वैरेतैर्जितः कृत्रभिप्राये क्रिया .1.3.72.
अभिविधि inclusive extension to a par-
ticular limit: inclusive limit cf. !
आहू मूद्भूयेीः P. [1.13, अङ्क ;
मर्यादाभिविध्येीरितं वक्तव्यम् M. IBh. on
I.4.89; (2) full or complete exten-
sion cf. अभिविधौ भाव इनुण् | अभूधिर-
भिचाक्षि: । सांस्तूर्णं वर्तते Ks on P. III.
3.4.
अभिव्य् absorption of a vowel when
two long vowcls of the samc kind
come together c. g. तां अर्प: = तपः,
अवस अ = &्:, thc 1csultant vowcl
bcing pronounccd specially long
consisting ofomc more tnitri, which
is cvidcatly, a fault of proinuncia-
tion. c[. अद्|जे अ!र्-: ; श्र' |् िवा
अदॆ कॊंटु | अभिथ अभिभू द
अभिथद्|्मू Uvvata on R. 'r. SlV.
27.
अभिव्ध,हृर cxpression , cf. यदेवं स्ने पदे
सानभ्यूद्र थति त :ज्ञ3 भ ै ि सिि-
रूपः स हिरण्यसंदृ Nir K.10.
अभिसारिणी namc of a nactrc in which
two fcct have tctn syllablcs attad
the other two have twclvc sy
Ilables: cf. वैराग्ज्ञागीं: पदेर्थे चेय-
हिरणी R. Pr, KVI. 3.
अभिरुचरित provided with a svarita or
circumflex accent.
अभिहित्， cxprcsscd (uscd in conncction
with the sense of a word) तेनेधभिः
सूत्रेण \[. Bh. on I.2.0 , 1.8.1 ; ex-
prcssed actually by a word or part
of a word, samc as iथा M. ll1.
on I.4.) 1.
अभूततद्भाव ]pcing what it was not
before, cf. न्धिं अभूततद्भाधश्र्ण् '.
V.4.5() Virt. !.
_K _ _ _
अभेद्क् not bringing about a diffcr-
cncc: not rmaking different pon-
discriminant;cf. शुक्रिां अभेद्र: Par.5ck.
Pari. 100 cf. भनु च भेदः अभेद्का अ[ च
गुणा दृश्यत M. Bh on I.1.1.
_K_ - _
_ अभेद्संसर्ग a conncction of unity, as
noticed bctwccn thc mominative
casc affix of the subject and thc
cnding fते of a verb, which pro-
duccs thc scnsc.
अभेदान्वय relation of mon-diflcrcncc
as stated by the Waiyākaranas

अभ्यन्तरः
between an adjective and the
substantive qualificd by t. c, g.
नीलमुत्पलम् is explained as नीलाभलं-
मुत्पलम्.
अभ्यन्तर interior contained in, held
in; cf. अभ्यन्तरांश्च समुद्ये अवयव: | तद्यथा
वृक्ष: प्रचलसहावयवैः प्रचलति M. Bh. on
I. 1.56.
अभ्यंकर ( BHASKARASHASTRI
bhyankar 1785-1870 A. D. )
an eminent scholar of Sanskrit
Grammar who preparcd a num-
. ber of Sanskrit scholars in Gram-
mar at Sitr. He has also
written a gloss on the Paribh∂-
Sendusekhara and another one ol
the Laghu-Sabdendusekhara.
(VASUDEVA SHASTRI Abhyaa-
kar ] 863-1942 A. D.) a stawar
Sanskrit Pandit, who, besides
writing several learned commen-
taries on books in several Sans-
krit Shastras, has written a com-
mentary mamed * Tattvdarsa ?
on the Paribhisendusekhara and
another named *Gidhirthapraksa'
on the Laghusabdcndusekhara.
( KASHINATH VASUDEVA
Abhyankar, 1890-) a student of
Sanskrit Grammar who has
written मढाभाष्यश्रस्तावना -खण्ड, and
जेनेन्द्रपरिभाषावृत्ति and compile the
परिभाषासंग्रहृ and the present Dic-
tionary of Sanskrit Grammar.
अभ्यम substitute for dat. and abl. pl.
affix भ्यस् after the words युष्मद् and
अस्मद् ; cf भसेsभ्यम् P. VHI.1.30.
अभ्यस्त repeated, redoubled word or
wording or part of a word. The
term अभ्यस्त is applied to the whole
doubled expression in Pnni!
grammar, cf. उभे अभ्यस्तम् P. VI.1.6:
(2) the six roots with जू placed
at the head viz. जक्ष् , जागृ, दरिद्रा ,
चक्रासु, इासू, दधी and बवी which in fact
are reduplicated forms of घस् , गृ, द्र,
कार् , झार् , धी and वी.
35 अस्याः
अभ्यात inclination towards an
actiou; tendency to do an act : cf.
संख्यायाः क्रियाभ्यावृत्तिगणने कृत्वसुच् | P. V.
4.17 अभिमुखीं प्रवृतिरभ्यावृत: (M. Bh.
on V.4.19) is the explanation in
the Mahabhgya,while पौनः पुन्यमभ्या-
वृत्तिः (Kas. on V.4.17) is the one
given in Kasik
अभ्य्रू Iit, doubling or reduplica-
tion technically the word refers
to the first portion of the redupli-
cation, which is called the redu-
plicative syllable as opposed to the
second part which is called the
reduplicated syllable; cf. पूर्वेभ्यःस:
P. VI. 1.4. (2) Repetition, the
sccond part which is repeated; cf.
देSभ्यारेक्ष(RT.165) explained as द्क[र:
अभ्यासे कुप्यते ， पटत्पटेति | द्रसद्सेति ; (3)
repeated action : cf. अभ्याख: पुनः पुन:
करणमावृति: Ks. oa P. 1-3, 1.
अभ्याहृढ ormission of amy sound a
fault of utterance.
अम् (1)a technical brief tern in Prinis
grammar including vowels, scmi-
vowels, the letter ， and nasals: (2) a
significant term for the accusative
case showing change or substitution
or modification: cf. अ विकारस्य T. Pr.
I.28 cxplained as अमित झाब्दे विक्रार-
स्वाख्घ, भवति | अामति द्वितीय थिंभनेरुपलक्षणम्
(3) augment आ applicd to the
penultimate vowel of पृ & दृढम् (P.
VI.1.58, 59 and VII.1.99) (4) sub-
stitute tor Ist pers sing. affix fमपू ,
by P. III.4 10 (5) Acc. sing. case
affix अम् .
अमर called अमरसिंहृ an ancient
grammarian mentioned in the
कंावकल्प्दुम by बपदवं. He is
believd to have written some
works on grammar such as दूर-
क्रछक्षण his famous existing work,
however , bcing thc Amarakosa or
Namalinginussana.

अमरचन्द्र
36
अरिफित
अमरचन्द्र a Jain grammarian who
is believed to be the writer of
स्यादिइध्दसमुच्चय, परिमल etc.
अमु tad. affix अम् applicd in Vedic
Literature to किम्, words ending
in ए, indeclinables and the affixes
तर and तम: e. g. प्रतरं नयामः प्रतरं वस्यः
cf. अमु च च्छन्दसि P. V. 4. 12.
अमृतभारर्तो a grammarian who is
believed to have written सुबोधिक्रा,
a gloss on the सारस्वतव्याकरण.
अमृतस्मृति called also अमृतद्युति, a com-
mentary on the प्रक्रियाकौमुदी of
रामचन्द्राष.
अमोघवर्ष A Jain grammarian of
the ninth century who wrote
the gloss known as अमेघावृत on
the Sabdanussana of Sikap-
yana; the वृत्त is quoted by माधव
in his धातुवृति.
अमीघा also अमेघादृत, a gloss on the
grammar of Sikayana. See अमोध-
वर्ष above.
अम्बाकत्र a commentary on Nigcas
Paribhasendusekhara named so, as
it commences with the words अक्वा
क्रत्रीं etc.
अस्पृछत utterance (of words) accom-
panied by water drops coming
out of the mouth; a fault of
utterange or pronunciation: मुखात्
विमुषो निर्गमनम् . It is explained diffe-
rently in the Rk. Prtikhya: cf.
ओष्ठाभ्यां नद्धं अम्वृक्तम् (R. Pr. XIV.2.)
held tight between the lips which of
course is a fault of pronunciation:
cf.ग्रस्तं निरस्तमवलाश्वतं नेतं अम्वृतं मत
मथे विकम्पितम्. MBh. I. 1. पस्पशाह्निकं.
अय् (l) substitute for the causal sign
णि before अाम्, अन्त, अालु etc. by
P, VI. 4.55 (2) substitute for ए
before a vowel by P. VI. 1. 78.
अय्ड् the substitute अय् for the final
ई of the root इी'by P. VII. 4.22.
अयच् tad. affix अय substitutcd op-
tionally for त् after द्वि and श्रि by l?.
V.2.48. e.g. थ, तथ्; श्रम त्रितथम.
अय्,अयाद् substitutcs for inst. sing
a[fix ट in Vedic literature c g.
स्वप्नया, नवय[.
अयवल non-mixture of words wherc
the previous word is in i.o way
thc cause Gf (ary charge in} thc
next word. अघानं अनिश्र:～ Uv. on
R. Pr. XI. 12 c. g, ओभी wlacrc
thc क्रमपाठ is अर्हि ई |
अयुज् a tcrm applied to thg odd fog!
ora stan%a; cf थुग्मानं '' दिने
द्वट्क्षरं | ओ रतेत ् R. Pr.
XVI. 39.
अयोगवाहृ thc letters or phonctic clc-
ments अनुरुचार,धिस, ज्ञद्वामृळय, उपमनीय
and यम callcd so,as tl.cy are always
uttcrcd only in combination with
another phonctic clcrncnt or ietter
such as अ or the like, and r1cver
independently; cf. अक्रादिनीं प्रेममू-
नाथेन संहृता: स:त: च वट्टति अमळभ ते
अयेागचाह्यःUvva!:a on Vaj.Pr.VIII. 8.
Thesc अथगव lctters possess tlac
charactcristics ofboth, thd vowcls as
well as consonants:cf अग्मट्सु
उपददा: कर्तयः णत्थं प्रयं ननभ ¶ जभर्थ .
प्रयंजनम् ! M. Bh. on -िं हृयः{र，.
अर: a tcchnical tcrn for Ardhadhi-
tuka affixes in the Mugdhabodha
grammar.
अरक्तसन्धि a word, the coalcscencc
of which is not nasali%:d, as thc
word अI in मन्द्रमा धेरण्यम् as contrast-
cd with अभ्र अ， अप:: cf. R. Pr.
X[*18.
अरड a Visarga which is not rhotaci%-
cd; thc term अरि्त is used in thc
Sarr1c SctaSe.
अरिफित not rhotaci2cd: not turned
into the lctter र: cf. विसर्जनीयेsरि्तं
दीर्धपूर्वः स्वरोदयः आकारम् ， R. Pr II. 9.

अरीहृणाद् 87
अर्थ
अरीहृणादि a group of words given in
P. IV. 2.80 which get the taddhita
affix बुञ् ( अक्र ) added to them as
a caturarthika affix e. g. अारीहृणक्रम,
द्रौघणकम् etc.see Ksik on P.IV.2.80.
अर्क the strong blowing of air from
the mouth at the time of the utte-
ºrance of the surd consonants: cf
Vaj. Siksद्व. 280.
अथे (I) lit.signification,conveyed sense
or object. The sense is sometimes
looked upon as a determinant of
the foot of a verse: cf. प्रायोर्थं वृत्तमित्येते
पादज्ञानस्य हृतच: R. Pr. XVII 16.
It is generally looked upon as
the determinant of a word ( पद ).
A unit or element of a word
which is possessed of an indepen-
dent sense is looked upon as a
Pada in the old Grammar treatises;
cf. अर्थः पदमिति एन्द्र: cf. also अर्थः पदम्
V. Pr. III.2, explained by उव्वट as
अर्थाभिधायि पदम् | पंद्यते गम्यते ज्ञायतSथे-
नेनेति पदम् | There is no difference
of opinion regarding the fact that,
out of the four standard kinds of
words नाम, आख्यात, उपसरी and निपात,
the first two kinds नाम and अाख्यात
do possess an independent sense
of their own. Regarding possession
of sense and the manner in which
the sense is conveyed, by the other
two viz. the Upasargas (preposi-
tions) and Niptas (particles) there
is a striking difference of opinion
among scholars of grammar. Al-
though Panini has given the actual
designation पद to words ending
with either the case or the conju-
gational afixes, he has looked
upon the different units or ele-
ments of a Pada such as the base,
the affix, the augment and the
like as possessed of individually
separate senses. There is practi-
cally nothing in Panini's stitras to |
prove that Nptas and Upasargas
do not possessan independent sense.
Re: Niptas, the rule च्चादयोSस्व,
which means that च and other
indeclinables are called Niptas
when they do not mean सत्व, pre-
sents a riddle as to the meaning
which व and the like should
convey if they do not mean
सत्त्व or द्रब्य् i. e. a substance. The
Niptas cannot mean भाव or verbal
activity and if they do not mean सत्त्ब
or द्रव्य, too, they will have to be call-
ed अनर्थक्र (absolutely meaningless)
and in that case they would not be
termed Pratipadika, and no case-
affix would be applied to them.
To avoid this difficulty, the Varti-
kakra had to make an effort and
he wrote a Vartika निपातस्य अनर्थकस्य
प्रातिपदिकत्वम् | P. I.2.45 Var. 12. As
a matter of fact the Niptas च, वा
and others do possess a sense as
shown by their presence and ab-
sence (अन्वय and ब्यतिरेक). The sense,
however, is conveyed rather in a
different rmanner as the word समूहृ,
or समुदाय, which is the meaning
conveyed by व in रामः कृष्णश्च, cannot
be substituted for व as its Synonym
in the sentence राम: कुष्णश्च. Looking
to the different ways in which
their sense is conveyed by nouns
and verbs on the one hand, and
by affixes, prepositions and inde-
clinables on the other hand, Bhar-
tphari, possibly following Yaska
and Vyadi, has developed the
theory of ्तकत्व as contrasted with
वान्वक्रत्व् and laid down the dictum
that indeclinables, affixes and
prepositions (उपसर्गs) do not direct-
ly convey any specific sense as
their own, but they are mere signs
to show some specific property or
excellence of the sense conveyed
by the word to which they are

अर्थगते 38 अर्धवसगे
अधेक a fault in the utterancc of a
attachcd; cf. . also the statcmcnt
{ न निर्धद्वा उपसर्गाः अथनिर्हुरिते दार्ष्ट्यन्:
नामख्यातर्थांस्तु क्रूपसंयेगचेतिक्रां भ्रांत |
Nir .8. The Grammarians, just
like the rhetoricians have stated
hat the connection between words
and their senses is a permanent
one ( नित्य ), the only difference in
theirviews being that the rhctori-
cians state that words are related;
no doubt permanently, to their
sense by means of संकेत or conven-
tion which solely depends on the
will of God, while the Grammarians
say that the expression of sense
is only a natural function of words;
cf. * अभिधाने पुनः स्वाभाविकम्' Vrttika
No.33. on P. I.2.64. For चेतक्रत्च see
Vakyapadya of Bharthari II .
165-206.
अर्थगत comprehension of sense : cf.
अर्थगत्यर्थः ईब्दप्रयोगः अर्थे संप्रत्याययिष्या-
मीति इब्दः प्रयुज्यत	M. Bh. on P. I.
1.44, HII.1.7 ctc.
अर्थग्रहृण use of the word * अर्थ : cf.
अर्थग्रहृगं करोति तज्ज्ञापयत्याश्चायै: M. Bh.
on I.1.1 1.
अर्थनिर्दज्ञा mention or specification of
sense. cf. अबद्यमुत्तरार्थमर्थनिर्देशः कर्तव्य:
M. Bh. IV.1.92.
अर्थवद्ग्रहणपरिभाषा a wcll known
maxim or Paribha of gramma-
rians fully stated as अर्थवद्ग्रहणे नानर्थ-
क्रस्य ग्रहृणम् , deduced from the phrase
अर्थवद्ग्रहृणात् frequently used by the
Varttikakra. The Paribhi lays
down that *when a combination
of letters employcd in Grammar,
is possessed of a sense, it has to be
taken as possessed ofsensc and not
such an one as is devoid of scnsc.'
अर्थाभिधान conveyance or expression
of sense, cf. अर्थाभिधानं पुनः स्वाभार्वकम्
P. I.2.64 Vºrt. 38. It is only a
nature of words that they convey
their sense.
vowcl of the kind of abridgmment
of a long uttcrance. अर्धहृरचमू ex-
plaincd as ह्यस्वस्यार्धम्-half the utter-
ance of thc short vowcl; cfतस्यादित
उदात्तमर्धहृरुवम् P. I.2.32. cf. also
तस्यादिरुचैरुतरमुदात्तादनन्तरं यावद् हृस्वस्य
Tai. Pr. I.44.
अर्धजरतीय a gucer combination of
half thc character of on c and half
cf anothcr, which is lookcd upon
as a fault: cf. न चेदानीमर्धजरतीयं छभ्यं
वृद्धिर्न भविष्यति स्वरो नति | तद्यथा " अर्ध
जेरत्याः कामयते अर्ध नेति ; M.Bh. om IV.
1.78; cf. also अर्ध जरल्या: पाक्राय अर्ध व
प्रस्रव्राय !
अर्धमात्रा half of a mitra or ' mora ':
cf. अर्धमात्रालाधधेन पुत्रोत्सवं मन्यते वैयाकरणाः
Par. Sekh. Pari. 122, signifying
that not a single clcment of utter-
ance in Panini's grammar is
supcrfluous. In other words, the
wording ofthc Sitras of Panini is
the briefest possiblc, not being
capablc ofrcduction by cven laalf
3u fraOra.
अधेमत्रि क taking for its uttcrance thc
time mcasured by thc uttcrancc of
half a mitr or mora; a conso-
hant, as it rcquires for its uttc-
rancc that timc which is nncasurcd
by half a mitra (tmtr being thc
time required for the utterancc
ofshort अ ); cf. R. Pr. I.16, T.
Pr.H.37, V. Pr. I.59.
e
es _ _
धेर्वाद a group of words given in
P. II. 4.3 which arc dcclincd in
both=thc masculinc and the neu-
tcr genders; c.g. अर्धर्चः, अधेर्धमू : यूथः,
यूथम् यदृ: एम्, ctc.: cf अर्धर्चाः पुंसिं च
P. II. 4.31.
अर्धविसर्ग a term uscd for the Jihv्-
rmiliya and Upadhminiya into
which a visarga is changed when
followed by thc letters , ख, and
the letters पू , पू respectively.

अर्धह्रस्वोदात्त
39
अल्पाच्तर
अर्धह्यस्वोद्ाक्त the acute (उदात्त) accent
which becomes specially उदात्त or
उदात्ततर when the vowel, whic
posseses it, forms the first half
of a स्वरित vowel.
अईआदे a class of words which
take the taddhita affix अव् (अ) in
the sense of the affix मतुप् i. e..in
the sense of possession; cf अर्हति
अस्य विद्यन्त अर्शस:	उरस: । आकृतिगणश्च-
यमू यत्राभिन्नरूपण इादन तद्वतोभिधानं तत्
सर्वमिह्य द्रष्टब्यम् Ks. cn P. V. 2.127.
अळ a प्रत्याहृार or a short term signifying
any letter in the alphabet of Panin
which consists of 9 vowels, 4 semi-
vowels, 25 class-consonants, and
4 sibilants.
अलक्षण that which is not a proper
लक्षण i. e. Stºtra: a Stitra which does
not teach definitely; a Sutra which
cannot be properly applied being
ambiguous in sense. cf ब्याख्यानतो
विशेषप्रतिपत्तिर्नहिं संदह्यादलक्षणम् Par. Sek.
Pari. I.
अलाक्षणिक (1) not used in a secondary ;
sense: (2) not accomplished by the
regular application of a grammar
rule: cf.निपातनैः सहृ निर्दइादत्रापि किंचिदला-
क्षणिकं कार्यमस्ति Kas. on HII.2.59.
अलिङ्ग (I) not possessed of a definite
gender: cf अलिङ्गमसंख्यमव्ययसंज्ञे भवत M.
Bh. on I.1.38; II.4.82;(2)आलेखे हुष्म-|
दस्मदी (Sid. Kau. on P.VII. 2.90)
अलिङ्गवचन not possessed of a definitc
gender and number; a term gene- |
rally used in connection with
अव्ययs or indeclinables.
अठक् absence of elision or omi-
SSIOn.
अलुक्समास a compound in which
the case-affixes are not drop-
ped. The Aluk compounds are
treated by Panini in WI.3.I
VI.3.24.
to
अलोन्त्यविधि an operation, which, on
the strength of its being enjoined
by means of the genitive case,
applies to the last letter of the
wording put in the genitive; cf.
नानर्थकेळोन्त्यविधिरनभ्यासविक्रांर M. Bh. on
I.1.65, cf. अळोन्त्यस्य | षष्ठीनिर्दिशन्त्यस्या-
दा: स्यात् S.K. on P. I.1.52.
अलोप absence of clision of an affix
etc. cf. सुप: अलीप: भवति वाक्ये | राज्ञः
पुरुष्टं इति	M. Bh. on II.1.1.
अलौकेकावेत्रह the dissolution of a
compound not in the usual popu-
lar manner. e. g. राजपुरुष: dissolved
as राजन् डस् पुरुष सु, as contrasted with
the ळौकिकविग्रहृ viz. राज्ञः पुरुष: । see also
अधिहृरि dissolved as हृरि डि. in the
अलौकिकविग्रहृ.
अल्प्रहृण (l) the word अल् actually
used in Parlinीं's rule e. g. अपृक्त
एकाल् प्रत्ययः P.I.2.41.(2) the wording
as अव्, or wording by mention of a
single letter e.g. अचि श्रुधातुधुवांय्बी: P,
WI.4.77.
अल्पतर feebler effort required in th.
production of sound or in the
tterance of a letter cf तैरोव्यञ्जनपाद
वृत्तयोरल्पतर: (प्रयत्न:) Tait. Pr.xx.12.
अल्पमयीग not of frequent occurence in
the spoken language or literature
the term is used in connection
with such words as are not fre-
guently used; cfसन्त्यल्पप्रयोगाः कृतोप्यैक-
| पदिकाः | त्रेततिर्दम्नाः जाटय आट्णारी जागरूको
| दर्वीमीत Nir I.14.
| अल्पप्राण (1) non-aspirate letters let-
| ters requiring little breath from the
mouth for their utterance as oppo-
sed to mahprina; (2) non-aspira-
tion; one of the external articulate
efforts characterizing the utterance
of non-aspirate letters.
अल्पाच्तर having a smaller number of
vowels in it; such a word is gene-
rally placed first in a Dvandva
compound; cf अल्पाच्तरम्, P.II.2.34.

अल्पापेक्ष
अल्पान्तरे पूर्वे भवति प्लक्षन्यग्रोधः अव्युत्तर .is
the same as अल्पाच्क्र used in the
प्रक्रियाकौमुदी or अल्पस्वरतर in Kitantra
(Kit, II. 5.12).
अल्पापेक्ष am operation requi ing a
smaller number of causes, which
merely on that account cannot bc
looked upon as अन्तरक्- The anta-
ranga operation has its causes
occurring earlier than those of
anotheroperation which istermed
बारङ्ग cf. वाहुरङ्गान्तरङ्गदाच्दाभ्यां बाह्यपक्षत्वाल्पा-
पक्षत्वयेः इदमयुदयाsलाभाच l तथा .सति
असिद्धं बहुपक्षमल्पोपक्ष इत्यव वदेत् ll Par.Sck.
Pari. 50.
अल्छीप elision or omission of a single
phonetic element or letter cf
अछोपीsन: P, VI.4.134.
अाल्वाध， an operation prcscribcd with
reference to one single letter: cf
स्थानिवदादोs नब्विधीं P. I.1.56.
अवकाशा occasion; possibility of appli-
cation: cf. इको गुणवृद्धी इत्यस्यावकाढा: !
न्वयनं चायेक: लवनं लावक्र:इति इदंीभयं प्राप्नोति |
मद्यति | माति	M. Bh. on I.1.3.
Vart. 6.
अवग्रहृ (1) separation of a compound
word into its component elements
as shown in the Pada-Patha of the
Vedic Sarhhits. In the Pada-
pagha, individual words are shown
separately if they are combined by
Sarhdhi rules or by the formation
of a compound in the Samhit्-
patha; e.g. पुरोहितम् in the Samhitऋ-
patha is read as पुरःsहितम्- In writ-
ing, there is observed the practice
of placing the sign ( S) betwcen
the two parts,about which nothing
can be said as to when and
how it originated. Thc Atharva-
Pratikhya defines अवग्रहृ as thc
separation of two padas joined in
Sarmhita. (A. Pr. II. 3.25: II. 4.5).
In the recital of the pada-pagha,
when the word-elements are utter-
40
अवग्रहविरराम
cd scparatcly, ticre is a noinc n-
tary pause measuring onc matra
or thc time requircd for the utter-
ance of a short vowel. (Scc for de-
tails Vij. Prºt. Adhya 5). (2) The
word अथग्रहृ is also uscd in the sense
ofthe first out of thc two words or
members that are compoundcd to-
gether. Scc Kiki on P.VIII.4.26;
cf. also तस्य ( यस्य ) पूर्वपदमधग्रहः यथा
दवायत इति द्रघ--ं. Tai. I'r. I. 49. The
term अवग्रहृ is cxplaincd in the
Mahabhasya as * scparation, or
splitting up of a compound word
into its constitutent parts; cf.
छन्दस्यानेकिवग्रहं छ्येले़ पितामहः इति ， (M.
Bh. on IV. 2.30); also cf. यद्यधमवग्रढ:
प्राश्नाति | न टक्षणन पदIर अनुवत्र्याः !
पदक्रारंनम ळक्षणमनुवत्र्थः | यथाठतणं पदे
कर्तव्यम् (M. IBh. on III. l . ]09)
where the Bh:yakara has definite-
ly statcd that thc writcrs of the
Padaptha havc to split up a word
according to the rules ofGrammar.
(3) In rcccnt titunes, howcv('r, thc
word अत्रग्र is uscd in thc s(:nsc of
the sign (c) showing thc coalc-
scence of अ (short or lotug) with
thc prcccding अ (short or long ) or
with the prcccding : or क्षेr.c.g .fश्3
चर्य:, अत्राSSगच्छ. (4) Thc word is also
used in the sense of a patisc, or an
intcrval of timc when thc consti-
tucntelcmcnts ofa compound word
are shown separately: cf. समासेथग्रहे
हृस्वसमकाल: (V. Pr. V.1). (5) Thc
word is also uscd in the scmsc of
the absencc of Sandhi whcn thc
Sandhi is admissiblc.
अवग्रहचिराम thc interval or pausc
after thc uttcrancc of thc first
mermber of a compound word
when thc mx:mbcrs arc uttcrcd
separately. This interval is cdual
to two noras according to Tait.
Pr. whilc, it is edual to one mora
according to the other Pratisakhyas.

अवड्
41
अधिघातार्थं
अवङ्क substitute अव् for the final औ of
the word गो: cf. अवङ् स्फोटायनस्य,
P. WI. 1.123, I24.
अवचन something which need not be
specifically prescribed or stated,
being already available or valid;
cf तृतीयासमास अर्थग्रहणमनर्थकं अर्थगतिर्हि
अवचनात् P. II. 1.30 V. 1.
अवचूरि a short gloss or commentary
on a standard work.
अवच्छद् exact limitation: cf. उदज्ञात्वा-
वच्छेदेने एकाजित्यर्थाच्च, Paf.Sek. 120.3.
अवधारण restriction: limitation: cf.
अवधारणमियत्तापरिच्छदः | यवदमत्रं ब्राह्मणान-
मन्त्रय्रूब Ka8. on P. II. 1.8.
अवधि limit,which is either exclusive
or inclusive of the particular rule
or word which characterizes it:
cf. सर्वश्च हृढ तं तमवधिंप्रति अन्त्ये भवति M.
Bh. on I. 3.3.
अवधिमत् object of limit: cf. दूरे चदव-
धिमान् अवघभेवति Kas. on P.V.3.37.
अघयव member or portion, as oppo-
sed to the total or collection
(समुदाय).which is called अव्यावन् ; cf.
अवयवप्रसिद्ध: समुदायप्रसिद्धिवेळीयसी Par.Sek.
Pari. 98. The conventional sense
is more powerful tham the deriva-
tive sense.
अवयवषष्ठी the genitive case signify-
ing or showing a part: cf. वक्ष्यत्यद-
् एव M.Bh. on I.
.21.
अवर्ण the letter अ; the first letter of
the Sanskrit alphabet, comprising
all its varieties caused by grades,
( ख, दर्व, प्ठत) or accents of nasa-
lization. The word वर्ण is used in
the neuter gender in the Maha-
bhasya: cf. सर्वमुखस्थानमवर्णम् M. Bh.
I.1.9, मा कदाचिदवर्ण भूत् M.Bh. I.1.48
Vart. 1; cf also M. Bh. on H.1.50
Vrt. 18 and I.1.51 Vrt. 2: cf.
also हृस्वमवर्ण प्रयोगे संवृतम् Siradeva
Pari. 17.
6
अवशंगम name of a Saffidhi when a
class consonant, followed by any
consonant is not changed, but
retained as it iscfस्पर्शः पूर्वं व्यञ्जनान्युत्त-
स्तणि अास्थापितानां अवशंगमं तत् R.Pr.IV.
l: eg. अारैक् पन्थाम् R.V. I. 113.16,
वषट् त (R.V. VII.99.7) अजानन् पुत्र:
(R. V. X.85.14).
अवह्निोष्टालेङ्ग (v.1. आवेशिष्टलिङ्ग) a term
occurring in the Lingnussana
meaning'possessed ofsuch genders
as have not been mentioned already
either singly or by combination?
i.e. possessed of all genders.Under
अवशिष्टलिङ्ग्ग are mentioned indeclin-
ables, numerals ending in ， orन् ,
adjectives, words ending / with
krtya affixes i. e, potential passive
participles, pronouns, words
ending with the affix अन in the
sense ofan instrument or a location
and the words कति and युष्मद् (See
पाणिनीय-लिङ्गानुशासन Sutras 182-188).
अवद्यम् necessarily; the expression
अवश्यं चैतदेवं विज्ञयम् is very frequently
used in the MahabhSya when the
same statement is to be empha-
sized.
अचस्तान palase, cessation, termination;
cf. विरामेSवंसानम् | वर्णानामभावः अवखान-
संज्ञ: स्यात् S. K. on P. 1. 4. 110.
अचस्था stage, condition; stage in the
formation of a word; e, g. उप-
देढावस्था, लावस्था, etc.
अचस्थित of a uniform nature: cf सिद्धं
त्ववस्थिता वर्णाः वक्तुश्चराचिरवचनाद् वृत्तये
विशिष्यन्त, M. Bh. I. 1.70 V. 5.
अवाक्षर deficient in one or more
syllables. The word is mostly used
in connection with a Vedic Mantra.
अवाग्योगविद् one who is not conver-
sant with the proper use of lang-
uage: cf. अथ येSवायेगविद् विज्ञानं तस्य
इारणम्: M. Bh. 1.1.1.
अविघातीर्थ meant for not preventing
the application (of a particular

अविचालेिन् 42
term) to others where it should
apply. The word is frequently
used in the Kasik: cf अजाद्यतष्टाप् !
टकारः सामान्यग्रहृणावघातार्थः | Ks. on P.
IV. I.4, also see KS. on III. 1.
133; III. 2,67, 73 IV. 1.78.
अविचालिन् immutable. The term is
used frequently in the Mahbh-
sya , in connection with letters
of the alphabet which are consi-
dered nitya by Grammarians;
अवृत्ति
shows the actual application of an
affix to somcthing allied to, or
similar to the base, and not to the
actual base as is sometimes found
in popular usc.cf द्वयोः दृब्दयोः समानार्थ-
येरेकेन विग्रहंीsपरस्मादुत्पतिर्भयार्त अविर-
चिक्रन्यायेन , तद्यथा अवेर्माससिति ग्रिह्य अाचक्र-
इद्दुत्पत्तिर्भवति आविक्रमिति | M. Bh.
on _ IV. ]. 88; cf also M.
Bh. on IV. 1. 89 : IV. 2. 60;
IV. 3.131, V. 1.7,28; VI. 2.11.
cf. नित्येषु व' इदषु कूटस्थैरविचालिभिर्वर्णर्भ- अविलम्वित name of a fault in pro-
क्षितव्यमनपायोपजनविकारिभि: M. Bh. I.
1. Ahn 2: cf also नित्यपर्यायवाची सिद्ध-
इाब्दः	यत्कूटस्थेष्चावचालिषु भावेषु वर्तते M.
Bh. on I. 1.1.
अविध non-application, ngn-prcभू-
cription ( अवैिधेान): cf. अङ्गवृत्ते पुनर्वृत्तौ
अविधिर्निष्ठितस्य M. Bh. on VII. I. 30 ;
Par. Sek. Pari. 92.
अविभक्तिक without the application
of a case termination.The term is
used frequently in connection with
such words as are found used by
Panini without any case-affix
in his Stras; sometimes, such
usage is explained by commenta-
tors as an archaic usage; cf. अवि-
भक्तिक्रीं निदेइ: | कृप उः रः लः | M. Bh. I
1. Ahn. 2; also M. Bh. on I. 1.3 ;
III. 1.36, VII. 1.3 etc.
अविभागपक्ष a view of grammarians
according to which therc arc
words which are lookcd upon as
not susceptible to derivation. The
terms अखण्डपक्ष and अव्युत्पन्नपक्ष are
nouncing a word where there is the
absence of a proper connection of
the breath with the place of utter-
ance: * अधिलाश्रितः वर्णान्तरासंभिज्ञः ' Pra-
dipa on M.Bh 1.I.1. There is the
word अचलचित which is also used
in the same sensc: cf ग्रस्तं निरस्तमव-
लाव्रतं निर्हतम् > M. Bh on I. 1. 1.
अविवक्षा non-intention: connivancc;
cf. सतेप्यद्विवक्षा भवति | अग्रेंभेका एडक्रा |
अनुदरा कन्या t also cf. प्राथिद्वरविवक्षात:
कर्मणेSकार्मका क्रिया.
अचिचक्षित (1) not taken tcchnically
into consideration, not meant: cf.
अधिवाक्षे कर्मणि प्र भथन M.bh on II.3.
52; (2) unncccssary: supcrfluous;
the word is cspccially uscd in
conncction with a word in a Stºtra
which could as well bc read with-
out that word. Thc word अतन्त्रं is
sometimes used similarly.
अचिरेाष absence of specification: cf.
गामादाग्रहृणेष्वार्धशेष:M.Bh.I.1.20 Vart 1;
Par. Sek. Pari. 106.
also used in the same sense. अविशेषित not specified, mentioned
अविरधिकन्याय a maxim mentipncd
by Patafijali in connection with
the word अाधिक्र where the taddhita
without any spccific attribute: cf.
एवमपि प्रयत्न: अधिशेषेत: भवाले M.Bh. on
I. 1.9; cf. also Kitan. W[.1.63.
affix ठक् (इक), although prescribed | अवृात absence of,or prohibition of, a
after the word अधि in the sense of
'flesh of sheep' (अवेः मांसम्), is actu-
ally put always after the base अधेिश्क
and never after अवि. The maxim
vrtti or composite expression: mon-
formation of a composite cxpress-
ion: cfसमानाधिकरणानां स्त्रावृतिरयेीगढकेन
M.Bh. on III. ]. 8.

अवृद्ध
अवृद्धlit.not beginning with the vowel
अा, ए or ओो;a word which has got
no अा or ， or ओ as its first vowel,
as for example ग्लुचुक्र, अहिचुम्बक्र etc.
इरावती, नर्मदा यमुना etc: cf. प्राचामवृद्धात्
फिन् बहुलम् P. IV. ]. 160. also
अवृद्धाभ्ये नदीमानुषीभ्यस्तन्नामिकाभ्यः P. IV.
1.113.
अव्यक्त ( 1 ) indistinct; inarticulate;
cf. अब्यक्तानुकरणस्यात इतौ P. VI. 1.98
also P. V. 4. 57; अव्यक्तं अपरिस्फुटवर्णम्
Kas. on P. VI. 1.98: (2) a fault of
pronunciation cf. नातिव्यैक्तं न चाव्यक्त-
मेवं वर्णीनुदीरयेत् | _
अव्यपवृक्त unseparated, undivided,
inseparable, mixed; cf. नाव्यपवृक्तस्य
अवयवे तद्विधिः यथां द्र्यषु M. Bh. on
Siva-sutra 4, V. 9 whereon Kai-
yata remarks व्यपवृक्तं भद: | अव्यपवृक्तं
अभिन्नबुद्धिविषयमक्रत्वालम्बनज्ञानग्राहं समुदा-
यरूपम् !
अव्यय indeelinable, lit. invariant, not
undergoing a change. Panini has
used the word as a technical term
and includes in it all such words
as स्वर्, अन्तर् , प्रातर् ete, or composite
expressions like अब्ययीभावसमास, or
such taddhitanta words as do
not take all case affixes as also
krdanta words ending in म् or ए,
ए, ओा, औौ. He gives such words in a
long list of Sutras P. I.1. 37 to
41: cf. सदृशं त्रिषु लिङ्गेषु सर्वासु च विभ-
क्तिषु ' वचनेषु च सर्वेषु यन्न ब्यति तदव्ययम्
Ka8. on P. I. 1. 37.
अव्ययसेग्रहं name of a treatise on,ind-
, eclinable words attributed to Saka-
tayana,
c
अव्ययार्थनिरूपण a work on the mean-
ings of indeclinable words written
in the sixteenth century A. D. by
VitthalaSesa, grandson of Rama-
candra Sesa the author of the Pra-
kriya Kaumudi.
अव्ययीभाव name of a compound so
.. called on account of the words for-
43 अव्युत्पातपक्ष
ming the compound, being similar
to indeclinables: e. g. निर्मक्षिकम् ,
अधिहृरि, यथामति, यावञ्जवम् etc.: cf. अन-
ययं अव्ययं भवतीत्यव्ययीभाव: M. Bh. om
II. I. 6. The peculiatity of the
avyayibhava compound is that the
first member of the compound
plays the rode of the principal
word: cf. पूर्वपदार्थप्रधानोव्ययीभाव: M.
Bh. on II. 1.6.
अव्यवधान absence of intervention
between two things by something
dissimilar; close sequence cf.
अतज्जातीयकं हि लोके व्यवधायकं भवति M.
Bh. on I.1.7. Wart. 8; cf also
येन नाव्यवधानं तन ब्यवहितपि वचनप्रामाण्यात्
M. Bh. on VII. 3. 44, VII 3.54,
VII. 4. l, VII. 4. 93. The term
अव्यवाय is used in the same sense.
अव्यवस्था absence of proper disposal;
absence of a proper method regard-
ing the application of a rule: cf.
पुनर्वच्छिभावः पुनरडिति चक्रकमव्यवस्था प्राप्नेति
M. Bh. on I. 3. 60 V. 5.
अव्याप्ति insufficient extension, as
opposed to अतिव्यानि orower applica-
tioh; cf.सवींपाधिव्यभिचारार्थम् • अयंप्यिति-
व्याप्त्यसंभवादिदेषपरिहृरर्थम् Padamafijar
on II. 1.32.
अव्याप्य an intransitive root; a techni-
cal term in the Candra Vyakarana
( C. Vy. I. 4. 70 ) as also in
Hemacandra's Sabdmussana; cf.
अव्याप्यस्य मुचेर्माग् वा ] मुचेरकर्मकस्य सकारादौ
सनि परे मेक् इत्ययेमादो वा स्यात् ， न चास्य
द्विः | मेक्षतिं मुमुक्षति चैत्र: । मीक्षते मुमुक्षत
वा वत्सः स्वयमेव Hem. IV. 1.19.
अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष the view held generally
by grammarians that all words are
not necessarily Susceptible to ana-
lysis or derivation, an alternative
view opposed to the view of the
etymologists or Nairuktas that every
word is derivable; cf. पाणिनस्त्वब्युत्पति-
पक्ष एवेति शब्देन्दुशेखरे निरूपितम् Pari.
Sekh. Pari. 22; वाचक उपादान: स्वरूप-
वानिति अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष Vyadi's Saringraha.

अव्युत्पन्न
अव्युत्पन्न underived, unanalysable cf.
उणादयेS्युत्पन्नानि प्रतिपादकानि M. Bh. I.
1.61 Vart. 4: Par. Sek. Pari. 22.
अव्युत्पन्नपक्ष same as अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष. See
above the word अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष.
अज्ञ (1) Pratyhara or a brief term
standing for all vowels, semi-
vowels, and the fifth, fourth and
third of the class-consonants; all
letters excepting the surds and sibi-
lants; {2) substitute अ for the word
इदम् before affixes of cases beginn-
ing with the instrumental, and
for एतद् before the tad. affixes त्र
and तस्: see P. II. 4.32 and 33;
(3) substitute अ for the gen. sing.
case-affix डट् after the words युष्मद्
and अस्मद्: see P. VII.1.27.
अञ्ाक्ति incapacity to pronounce
words correctly; cf. अद्भाक्त्या कयाचिद् ;
ब्राह्मण्या ऋतक इति प्रयेोक्तव्ये लतक्र इति प्रयुक्तम्
M.Bh. on Siva-sutra 2.
आहीष्य unnecessary to be prcscribed
or laid down.; cf.तदशिष्यं संज्ञाप्रमाणत्वात्
P. I.2. 53; also लिङ्क अािप्यं लोक्राश्रयत्वा-
छिङ्गस्य M.Bh. on II. 1. 36.
अदमादि a class of words headed by
the word अश्मन् to which the taddh-
ita affix र is applied in thc four
senses specified in P. IV. 2. 67 to
70; e.g. अमर:, ऊषरम् , नगरम् , पामर:
गहुरम् etc. cf. P.IV. 2.80.
अश्वघासादि compounds like अश्वास
which cannot be strictly correct as
चतुथींसमास, but can be षष्ठीसमास if the
word तदर्थ in the rule चतुर्थी तदर्थार्थ-
बलिहितसुखरक्षितै: be understood in thc
sense of*meant for a particular
thing which is to be formed out of
it: cf विकृतिः प्रकृत्येति चद्रश्वधासादीनामुपसं-
ख्यानम् M.Bh. on II. 1. 36.
अश्वपत्यादि a class of words headed
by अश्वपति to which the taddhita
affix अणु (अ) is added in thc senses
mentioned in rules before the rule
तेन दीव्यति< P. IV.4. 2, which are
44
अष्टाध्यायी
technically called the Prigdivya-
tiya senses. c g. अश्वपतभ , गणपतिम् .
गार्हपतम् etc.
अ%घत्थनारायण a c:;mmentator who
wrote a gloss on Panini's A!-
dhyay in the Tamil language.
अ%चादि (1) a class of words headed
by the word अश्च to which the affix
फझ (अायन) is added in the sense of
गोत्र(grandchildren etc.) ;c.g.अश्वायन:
जातीयेन:, ओत्तायन: etc.: cf. P. IV. 1.
1 10; (2) a class of words hcaded
by the word अश्च to which the
taddhita affix यत् is added in the
sensc of a causc of thc type of a
mecting or an accidental circum-
stance; c.g. अश्क्रिम् अामिकम् cf. P.
V. 1.39.
अछक another name for the famous
work of Pinini popularly called
the A!dhyyi; cf. अवध्यायाः परि-
माणमस्य सूत्रस्य अष्टकं श्राfiनीथम् | द्वं या-
ग्रपदीयम् / त्रिंकं क्रुद्राक्स्रम Ks on P. V.
1. 58; ' ( 2 ) students of Pitaini's
grammar, c. g. अश्टकां: पf्थः ; cf.
सूत्रान्उच क्रौपधात् | Ks. on P.IV. 2. 65.
अष्टम a term uscd by ancient gram-
marians for the vocative casc.
अष्टमङ्गलं namc of a commentary on
the Katantra Vyikaraha by Rim-
akiśoracakravartin.
अष्टध्यायी namepopularly given to the
Strapgha of 'arini consisting of
cight books (adhyyas) containing
in all3981 Sutras,as found in thc tra-
ditional rccital, current at thc time
of the authors of the Kik. Out of
these 398l Stitras, sevcn arc found
given as Virtikas in the Mahabha-
Sya and two are found in Ganap-
tha.Thc author of thc Mahabha ya
has commented upon only 1228 of
these 3981 stras. Originally there
were a very few differences ofread-
ings also, as observed by Patafijali
( see Mbh on I.4.1 ); but the text

अष्टाक्षरा
was fixed by Patafijali which, with
a few additions made by the auth-
ors of the Ksika.as observed above,
has traditionally come down to the
present day. The Astadhyayi is
believed to be one of the six Ved-
anga works which are committed to
memory by the reciters of Rgveda.
The text of the Astadhyay is recited
without accents. The word अष्टाध्यायी
was current in Patafijal's time; cf.
शिष्टज्ञानार्था अष्टाध्यायी M. Bh. on VI.
3.109.
अष्टाक्षरा a metre having eight sylla-
bles in a foot:cf.गायत्री सा चतुर्विंशत्यक्षरा !
' अष्टाक्षगत्रयः पादाः चत्वारो वा षडक्षरा: R.
Pr. XVI. 9. _
अटि name of a metre of four feet
consisting of 64 syllables in all, 12
syllables in the odd feet and 20 in
the even feet; e. g. त्रिकदुकेषु महृिष:
etc. R.V. II. 22. 1.
अस् (I) case affix of the nominative
and accusative plural and the ab-
lative and genitive singular (जस् ,
इस्, डa and डस् ) (2) taddhita affix
अस् ( असि ) added to पूर्व, अधर and
अवर, by P. V.3.39: (3) compound-
ending अस् ( असिच् ) applied to the
words प्रजा and मघा standing at the
end of a Bahuvrihi compound
( P. W.4. 122 ): (4) Uhadi affix अस्
prescribed by the rule सर्वधातुभ्यंीSसुन्
and subsequent rules (648-678) to
form words such as मन्,सर etc.(5)
ending syllable अ, with or with-
out sense, of words in connection
with which special operations are
given in grammar; cf P.WI.4.14;
cf. also अनिनस्मन्ग्रहणान्यर्थवता चानर्थकेन च
तदन्तविधिं प्रयेोजयन्ति Par.Sek. Pari. 16.
अस affix अस mentioned in the Niru-
kta in the word अवस ( अव् + अस )
cf.असे नामकरणः तस्माल्लाव्हुन्ति NirI,17.
असंख्य not possessing any notion of
number the word is used in con-
45
असमर्थ
nection with avyayas or indeclina-
bles; यथेव ，ि आलमब्ययमेवमसंख्यमपि
M. Bh. on II. 4. 82.
असंज्ञक a term used for the Cndra
Grammar,as no sahjfas or techni-
' cal terms are used therein; cf.वा
चासंज्ञकं स्मृतम्.
अर्जज्ञ not used as a technical term or
name of a thing: cf पूर्वेपरावरदक्षिणोक्त-
प्राधुणि ब्यवस्थायामसंज्ञायां P.1.1.34.
असंनिकर्ष ( ! ) separatedness as in the
, case of two distinct words: ( 2 )
absence of co-alescence preven-
ting the sandhi; cf R.T. 68,70.
असंनेिघान the same as असोकं: see
above; e. g. भरा इन्द्र; तमु आभप्रगायत.
अस्नंप्रत्यय failure to understand the
sense; cf. इतरथा ह्यसंप्रत्ययोSक्ात्रमत्वाद्यथा
लंके M. Bh. on I.1.23 Vrt, 3.
असंभव Impossibility of occurrence
(used in connection with an
operation); cf नावद्यं द्विकार्ययोग एव
विप्रतिषेध : | किं तर्हि | असेभचेपि , M.
Bh. I.1.12 Vart. 3; (2) impossibi-
lity of a statement, mention, act
etc. cf. असंभव: खल्वपि अर्थादेर्ज्ञानस्य M.
Bh. on II. 1.1.
असंयोगा absence of the conjunction
of consonants; cf. असंयोगाछट् केित्
P. I. 2.5.
असंहिता absence of juxta-position,
absence of connectedness; cf.
यदि तावत्सांईतय निर्देशः क्रियते भ्वादय इति
भवितव्यम् | अथासेहृितया भू अादय इति
भविंतव्यम् M. Bh. on I. 3.1.
असरव (l) absence of सत्त्व or entity:
(2) other than a substance i. e.
property, attribute, etc. cf. प्रादयः
असत्त्ववचना निपातसंज्ञा भवन्ति M. Bh. I.
4. 59; cf. also सोSसत्त्वप्रकृतिर्गण: M.
Bh. on IV. 1.44. cf. also चादयोs
सचे P. I. 4.57.
असमर्थ (1) syntactically not con-
nected, e. g. रर: and पुरुष: in the
sentence भेर्या राज्ञः पुरुषो देवदत्तस्य (2)

असमथस्समास्ल
46
_K
अांसद्ध
unable to enter into a compound
word, the term is used in con-
nection with a word which can-
not be compounded with another
word, although related in sense
to it, and connected with it by
apposition or by a suitable gase
affix, the reason being that it is
connected more closely | with an-
other word: cf. सापेक्षमसमर्थं भवति M.
Bh. II. 1. 1.: e. g. the words कथं
and श्रितः in the sentence Hहृत्
कष्टं श्रित:.
असमर्थसमास a compound of two
words, which ordinarily is in-
admissible, ome of the two words
being more closely connected
with a third word, but which
takes place on the authority of
usage, there being no obstacle
in the way of understanding the
sense to be conveyed;e. g. देवदत्तस्य
गुरुकुलम् देवदत्तस्य दासभार्या | असूयैपद्यानि
मुखींनि, अश्राद्धभेीजी श्राह्मण: M. Bh. on
II. 1.] .
असमस्त not compoundcd, not en-
tered into a compound with an-
other word; cf. समासे असमस्तस्य Hem.
II. 3.13.
असमास ( 1) absence of a compound.
उपसर्गादसमासेपि णोपदेश्ास्य P. VIII. 4.14;
(2) an expression conveying the
sense of a compound word al-
though standing in the form of
separate words: चार्थे द्वन्द्ववचने असमासेपि
वार्थसंप्रत्ययादनिष्टं प्राप्नोति | अहृरहृर्नयमानेो
गामश्वं पुरुषं पशुम् M. Bh. on II.2.29.
असरूप not having the same out-
ward form or appearance; e. g.
the affixes अण्, अच्, ण, अट्, ञ्ज, and
the like which are, in fact, सरूप as
they have the same outward form
viz. the affix अ. अण् and यत्
_ असरूप; cf. बाSसख्पेीsस्त्रियाम् P. III.
.94.
असर्वेविभक्ति not admitting all case-
affixes to be attached to it: cf.
तद्धितश्चासर्वविभक्ति: P. I. 1. 38: यस्मन्न
सर्वेविभक्तरुत्पात: सेींसर्वविभक्तिः ， तत: यत: तत्र
यत्र | Ks. on I. 1.38.
असामथ्र्य absence of a syntactical con-
nection cf दा पद्ध: | धूर्तन पद्ध: !
असामथ्र्यादत्र समासो न भविष्यातं | कर्थम-
सामथ्र्यम् | सूत्रापेक्षमुसमर्थं भवतीति | न हि दनः
पढन् सामथ्येम् ) केन त ि भुजिना | दना
भुङ्क्ते पद्धरिति' M. Bh. on II. 1.30.
असारूप्य dissimilarity in apparent
form (although the rcal wording in
existence might be the same) c. g.
↑ डुप्, च|प्: cf. नानुबन्धकृतमसारूप्यम् !
Par. Sek. Pari. 8.
_K
अख् ि(I) Und afix असु ; (2) tad.
* अमू. Sec above the word असू.
आ|्च samsa-ending affix असु. See
above the word अम्.
असिद्ध invalid; of suspended validity
for the time bcing: not functioning
for the time being. Thc term is
frequently used in Paninis system
of grammar in connection with
rules or operations which are
preventcd, or held in suspense, in
connection with their application
in the process of the formation of
a word. The term (अासद्ध) is also
used in connection with rules
that have applicd or operations
that have taken place, which are,
in certain cases, made invalid or
invisible as fair as their cffect is
concerned and other rules are
applied or other operations are
allowed to take place, which
ordinarily have been prevented
by those rules which are made
invalid had they not been inva-
lidated. Pinini has laid down
this invalidity on three different
occasions (1) invalidity by the
rule पूर्वत्रासिद्धम् VIII. 2.1. which
makes a rule or operation in the

असिद्ध
47
अस्थ
second, third and fourth quarters
of the eighth chapter of the
ASadhyayi invalid when any pre-
ceding rule is to be applied, (2)
invalidity by the rule असिद्धवदत्राभूत्
which enjoins mutual invalidity
in the case of operations prescrib-
ed in the Abhiya section begin-
ning with the rule असिद्धवत्राभात् (VI.
4.22.) and going on upto the end
of the Pada (VI.4.175), (3) invali-
dity of the single substitute for two
letters, that has already taken
place, when √ is to be substituted
for सु, or the letter त् is to
be prefixed, cf. षत्वतुकोरासद्ध:
CVI. 1.86). Although Panini laid
down the general rule that a
subsequent rule or operation, in
case of conflict, supersedes the
preceding rule, in many cases it
became necessary for him to set,
that rule aside, which he did by
means of the stratagem of inva-
lidity given above. Subsequent
grammarians found out a number
of additional cases where it be-
came necessary to supersede the
subseguent rule which they did
by laying down a dictum of in-
validity similar to that of Panini.
The author of the Wrttikas,
hence, laid down the doctrine
that rules which are nitya or
antarafiga or apavada, are strong-
er than, and hence supersede,
the anitya, bahiranga and utsarga
rules respectively. Later gratm )
marians have laid down in general,
the invalidity of the bahiranga rule
when the antaranga rule occurs
along with it or subsequent to it.
For details see Vol. 7 of Vyaka-
rana Mahabhasya (D. E. Society's
edition) pages 217-220. See also
Pari. Sek. Pari. 50.
असिद्धत्व invalidity of a rule or ope-
ration on account of the various
considerations sketched above.
See आसद्ध.
अलद्धपरिभाषा the same as Antaranga
Paribha or the doctrine of the
invalidity of the bahirafga ope-
ration. See the word असिद्ध above.
For details see the Paribhagº
* asiddham , bahirangam anta-
rahge ' Par. Sek. Pari. 50 and the
discussion thereon. Some gram-
marians have given the name
असिद्धपरिभाषा to the Paribhs असिद्धं
बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्ग as contrasted with
अन्तरङ्गं बहुिरङ्कगाद् वलीयः which they
have named as बहिरङ्गपरिभाषा.
असृक् the augment अस् seen in Vedic
Literature added to the nom. pl.
case-affix ज् following a noun-
base ending in अ: e.g, जनास:, देवास:
etc. cf आञ्जसेरसुक् P. VII. 1.50, 51.
असुड् substitute असू for the last letter
of the word पुंस् before the सर्वेनाम-
स्थान affixes i. e. before the first
five case affixes,e.g. पुमान् पुमांसौ etc.;
cf. पुसेीsसुड् P. VII. 1. 89
असुन Undi affix अस् ( असुन् ) by सवै-
धातुभ्येोSमुन् वक्तव्य: Un. Sपे.628; cf. न
वेत्तीति नद्वदा:	वेतिरसुन्प्रत्ययान्तः Kas. on
P. WI. 3. 75.
असे krt affix in the sense of the infini-
tive (तुमर्थे) in Vedic Literature,e.g-
जीबस: cf. तुमर्थे ससनसo P. III. 4. 9
अस्ताति tad. affix अस्तात् in the sense
of the base itself, but called विभाक्त,
prescribed after words in the sense
of * direction ', e. g. पुरस्तात्, अधस्तात्
etc. cf. दिक्छाब्देभ्यः सप्तैमीपञ्चमीप्रथमाभ्येा
दिग्देशकालेषु अस्तातिः P. V. 3. 27.
अस्थ अ, अा and अा. This term is
' used in Rk Tantra cf. अस्थनाभिनी
सन्ध्यम् R. T. 94, अस्थ possibly means
* belonging to अ i. e. all the three
grades ईरुब, दीर्ध and प्लुत of अ '.

अस्पष्ट
48
अस्पष्ट less in contact with the vocal
organ than the semi-vowels; the
term occurs in Hemacandra's
Grammar (Hem. I. 3. 25) and is
explained by the commentator
as' ईषत्स्पृष्टतरौ प्रत्यास्तर्यकारवकारौ. अस्पष्ट
stands for the letters य and च which
are substituted for the vowels ए
ए and ओ औ when followed by a
vowel: cf, also Sak I. I. 154.
अस्पृष्ट not in contact with any vocai
organ; the term is used in connec-
tion with the effort required for
the utterane of vowels, अनुस्वार and
sibilants when no specific contact
with a vocal organ is necessary:
cf. स्वरानुस्वारेाष्मणामस्पृष्टं रणे स्थितम् R.
Pr. XIII. 3.
अस्मद् first person; the term is used in
the sense of the first person in the
grammars of Hemacandra and
Sakatyana. cf. त्रीणि त्रीण्यन्ययुष्मदस्मद्
( Hem. III. 3, 17 );
अस्वपदविग्रह a term used for thosc
compounds, the dissolution of
which cannot be shown by the
members of the compound: c. g.
सुमुखी: cf भवति वै कश्चिदस्र्वपदविग्रहेपि वहु-
व्रीहि: | तद्यथा ] ज्ञेभनं मुरवमस्याः सुमुखीति
M.Bh. on W. 4. 5.
अस्वर्यदृष्ट A term used for the per-
fect tense: cf. कु चकारमस्वयंदृष्ट (R.T.
19l).
अस्व not homogeneous: asavarta. cf.
इवर्णादेः अत्रे स्वरे यवरलम् Hem. I. 2.21,
also अस्वे Sak. I. 1.73.
अस्वरक untoned; a word without
an accent, as different from a
word which has an accent,but whi-
ch is not uttered with that accent:
cf अक्रियमाणे हुपदेशिवद्भावे...अान्तर्यत अांदेद्दां
अस्वरकाणामस्वरकाः स्युः M.Bh. on VII.
1.2, VII. 1. 89.
अ (1) the long form of the vowel अ
called दीर्ध,consisting oftwo mitras,
in contrast with (l) the short अ
which consists of one matr and the
protracted आ3 which consists of
three mºtrºs; (2) substitute अा
of two matris when prescribed by
the word दीर्ध or वृद्व for the
short vowcl अ: (3) upasarga अा
( अाङ्क) in the sense of limit c.g. अा
क्रडारादेका संज्ञा (P. I. 4.1.) अ[कुमारं यदा:
प्राणिनः K. on II. 1.13. अI उदक्रान्तात्
(M. Bh. on I. 1.14.) (4) indeclin-
able आ in the sense of remcm-
brancc e. g. आ एवं नु मन्यतां: cf.
ईबद्र्थे क्रियायेंगे मर्यादाभिविधौ च यः एतमातं
डितं धिद्याद्वाक्यस्मरणयेरडित् M. Bh. on
I.1.14; (5) augment अा ( अाकू ) as
scen in चराचर, बदाचद् etc. cf. M.
Bh. VI. 1.12 Vrt. 6: (6) augment
अा ( अट् ) prefixed to roots in the
tenses ढइ, लङ् and ढ : (7) substi-
tute अा prcscribcd for the last
lctter of pronouns bcforc thc tad.
afiixcs दृक्,दृढ, दृक्ष and घत्, as in Hदृ,
तादृढा ctc.; (8) feminine affix अ (टय्,
डप or चाप् ) addcd to nouns crad-
ing in अा: (9) substitute अ ( अ!
or अात्, or डा or अच् ) for casc
affixes in Vedic literatureउभा यन्तारौ,
नाभा पृथिव्या: etc.
9 - _
अ indeclinable अ pronounccd nasa-
lized, e. g. अभ्र अ， अप: M. Bh.
I. 3.2.
आक् see above the word अI sensc(5).
आकम् the substitute आक्रम् for साम of
thc gen. pl. after the words युष्मद्
and अस्मद् c. g- युष्माकं, अस्माक्रम् cf.
P. VII. 1.33.
आकर्षक ( a word ) attracting amo-
thcr word statcd prcviously in
the context e. g. the word व in
the rules of Panini.

आकर्षाद्ि 49
आकर्षीदि a class of words headed by
the word आकर्ष to which the tadd-
hita affix क्रन् (क) is applied in the
sense of clever or expert; e. g.
आकर्षक्र:, त्सरुक:, दाकुनिक्र: etc.: cf. P.
अाकर्षादिभ्यः क्रन् P. V.2.64.
आकङ्क (or साकडु also) expectant of
another word in the context, e. g.
कूज and ब्याहृर in अङ्ग कूज ,अङ्ग ब्याहृर ?
इदानीं ज्ञास्यसे जाल्म Kas. on अङ्गयुक्तं
तिडाकङ्कम् (P.VIII. 2.96).
अाख्या
cf also यत्तर्हि तद् भिन्नेष्वभिन्नं छिनेष्वच्छिन्नं
सामान्यभूतं स दाब्दः · नेत्याहु | अाकृतिनांम सा.
M. Bh. I. 1.Ahn.1 ; ( 4 ) a metre
consisting of 88 letters cf R. Prat.
XVI. 56,57.
अाक्रुतगण a class or group of words
in which some words are actually
mentioned and room is left to
include others which are found
undergoing the same opera-
tion; cf. श्रण्याद्यः कृतादिभ: । श्रेण्यादयः
पच्चन्ते कृतादिराकृतिगणः M. Bh. on
II.1. 59. Haradatta defines the
word as प्रयेोगदर्शनेन आकृतिग्राह्यो गणः
अाकृतिगण: | अत्र अादिइाब्दः प्रक्ररे | अाकृति-
गणेपि उदाहरणरूपेण कतिपयान् पठति कृत मत
इत्यादि Padamanjar on II.I. 59 ; cf.
Pradipa of Kaiyapa also on II. 1.
59.Some of the ganas mentioned by
Panini are krtiganas, e.g. अर्दी-
आदिगण, मूलविभुजादिगण, व्रात्यादिगण,
शिवादिगण, पचादिगण, and others.
आक्षरसमाम्नायिक directly or expressly
mentioned in the fourteen Pratya-
hara Stºtras of Panini; a letter
actually mentioned by Patini in
his alphabet ' अइउण्', ऋलृक् * etc.
आक्षेघ (l) taken as understood, being
required to complete the sense; cf.
किबपि अाक्षितं भवति M. Bh. on III.2.
178;(2) a term used for the circum-
flex accent or स्वरित as it is uttered
by a zig-2ag motion of the organ
आकङ्क expectancy with regard to
sense-completion, generally in
compounds such as साकङ्क, निराकङ्क
etc. cf. अरूयमिलाकङ्क इत्यतः साकङ्कम्
M. Bh. on III. 2. I14.
आकाङ्क, a word for which there is
expectaney of another word for
the completion of sense.
आकार the letter आ: cf. अक्रूरस्य् विवृतोप-
दळा अाकारग्रहृणार्थः । M. Bh. I. 1 ¶hn.
2.
आकिनिच् tad. aff अाक्रिन् affixed to
the word एक in the sense of
* single,' alone'; cf. एकादशाक्रनिचासह्याये
P. W. 3.52.
आडरुर्मीय a group of 43 roots of the
बुरादे class of roots beginning
with the root चित् and ending
with कुरुम् which are Atmanepadin
only. in the mouth caused by the air
ना¶ ¶ ¶: injdgalthingःcः| " ्
एकरुया अाकृतश्चरितः प्रयोगो द्वितीयस्यास्तृतीय-
स स्वरितः U7vata on R. Pr. III. 1.
आक्षेप a zig-2ag motion of the organs
producing sound caused by the
air see अक्षित above.
आख्यt designation, conventional
स्याश्च न भवति M. Bh. on III. 1.40
Wrt. 6. The word is derived as
आक्रियंत सा आकृतेि: and explained as
संस्थानम्: cf. अाक्रियत व्यज्यत अनया इति
अाकृतिः सेस्थानमुच्यते Nyāsa on IV.1.63
(2) general form which, in a way,
is equivalent to the generic notion
or genus; cf. आकृत्युपदेशात्सिद्धम् | अवर्णा-
कृतिरुपदिष्टां सर्वमवर्णकुलं ग्रहीष्यति M. Bh.
# 1. Ahn. 1; (3) notion of genus ,
7 _
name: cf. देवदते मुण्डयपि जट्यपि ख्वामा-
ख्यां न जह्याति M. Bh. om I.1.1 : cf.
also स्वमज्ञातिधनाख्यायाम् P. I. 1.35: cf.
also वर्णः क्रूरेत्तरो बर्णाख्या Tai. Prat. I.
16.

अाख्यात
50
आगन्तुक
अाख्यात verbal form, verb;
I.1; चत्वारि पदजातानि नामाख्यातोपसर्गनि-
पाताश्च M. Bh. I.1. Ahmika 1 ; also
A.Prt. XII. 5, अाकार् अाख्यात
पद्ादश्र M. Bh. I. 2.37 Vrt. 2,
आख्यातमार्यातन क्रियासातत्ये Sid. Kau.
on II. }. 72, क्रियावान्वक्रमाख्यात V.
Pr. V.1 ; cf. भारद्वाजक्रमाख्यातं भार्गवं नाम
भाष्यंत · भारद्वाजेन दृष्टत्वादाख्यातं भारद्वाज-
गेत्रम् V. Prat. VIII. 52; cf. also
Athar. Prt. I. I. 12, 18; 1. 3. 3,6;
II. 2. 5 where khyta means ver-
bal form. The word also meant in
ancient days the root also,as differ-
entiated from a verb 0r a verbal
form as is shown by the lines तलाम
येनाभिदधाति सत्त्वं, तदार्यार्त येन भावे सं धातुः
R. Pr. XII. 5 where * आख्यात * and
*धातु' are used as synonyms As the
root form such as 5, भ् etc. as dis-
tinct from the verbal form, is never
found in actual use, it is immater-
ial whether the word means root or
verb.In the passages quoted above
from the Nirukta and thc Mah-
bhasya referring to the four kinds
of words, the word khyata could
be taken to mean root ( धातु ) or
verb (क्रियापद). The khyta or verb
is chiefly concerned with the
process of being and bccoming
while nouns (नामानि) have sattva or
essence, or static elemcnt as their
meaning. Verbs and nouns are
concerned not merely with the acti-
vities and things in this world but
with every process and entity: cf.
पूर्वापूरीभूतं भावंम्ख्यातनाश्च Nir. I.:अस्ति-
भवतिविद्यतीनामर्थः सत्ता | अनक्रक्राळस्थाय-
नीति कालगतपौर्वापर्येण क्रमवतीति तस्याः क्रियां-
खमू | Laghumafiji. When a krt.
affix is added to a root, the static
element predominates and hence
a word ending with a krt. affix in
the sense of bhava or verbal acti-
wity is treated as a noun and regu-
cf. ]
भावप्रधानमाख्यातं सत्त्वप्रधानानि नामानि Nir. |
larly declined;cf.कृदभिहितेो भावे द्रक्
भवति M.Bh. on II. 2. 19 and III.
1.67, where the words गति, व्रज्या, पाक
and others are given as instances,
Regarding indeclinable wordsend-
ing with kt. affixcs such as क्रतुं,
कृत्वा, and others, the moderm gram-
marians hold that in their case the
verbal activity is not shadowed
by the static element and hence
they can be,in a way, looked upon
as khyatas; cf. अब्ययक्ते भाथे Vaiy-
karaabhisana.
अख्यातप्रक्रिया a work dcaling with
verbs, written by Anubhttisvaripa-
carya on the Srasvata Vyākarana.
अाख्यातचिचक a work dcaling with
verbs and their activity by Krna-
Shastri Arade a great Niyyika of
the 18th century.
अाख्यातव्याकरण a trcatise on vcrbs
discussing verbal forms by Vaiga-
Seaa..
अागन्तुक lit. adventitious, an addi-
tional wording gencrally at thc
end of roots to show distinctly
thcir form c.g. घर्दि, एधि, सर्ति ctc.;
cf. इन्धिभवतिभ्यां च P I. 2. 6: cf.
alsg भलक्षणं शृणु्वर्दि्रहृताभेजनि-
भ्यस्तेtमुन्, P. III. 4.16, सृपवृदे. कैमु. P.
LII. 4. 17 and a number of6ther
sutras whcre इ or तिं is addcd to
the root cf. इक्तौ धातुनिर्द, चर्मा-
त्कार:, राादे: P. III. 3.108 Virt. 2.3.
4, wherc such appcndages to be
added to the roots or lcttcrs are
given. The word अागन्तु is an old
word uscd in the Nirukta, but thc
term आगन्तुक्र appears to bc uscd
for the first time for such forms
by Haradatta; cf. हुर्रेति द्व र्कौटिल्य,
<-
आगन्तुकेकर गुणेन निर्द:Padamanjar on
WHI. 2. 31. In the traditional oral
explanations the second part of a
reduplicated word is termcd
अागन्तुक् which is placed second

अारrम
* 51
अाङ्ग
i. e. after the original by vir-
tue of the convention आगन्तू-
नामन्ते निवेद्रा:, although in fact, it
is said to possess the sense of
the root in contrast with the
first which is called abhysa.A nice
, distinction can, however be drawn
between the four kinds of adventi-
` tious wordings found in grammar
viz.आगन्तु, इत्, अभ्यास andआगम which
can be briefiy stated as follows;
The former two do not form a
regular part of the word and are
not found in the actual use of the
word; besides, they do not possess
any sense, while the latter two are
found in actual use and they are
possessed of sense. Again the
agantu word is simply used for
facility of understanding exactly |
and correctly the previous word !
which is really wanted; the इत् !
wording, besides serving this pur-
pose, is of use in causing some
grammatical operations. अभ्यास, i3
the first part of the wording which
is wholly repeated and it possesses
no sense by itself, while, gama
which is added to the word either
' at the beginning or at the end or
inserted in the middle, forms a
* part of the word and possesses the
sense of the word.
आगम augment, accrement, a word
element which is added to the
primitive or basic word during the
process of the formation of a com-
plete word or pada. The gama
is an adventitious word element
and hence differs from deSa, the
substitute which wholly takes the
place of the original or ( अदिशिन् ).
' Out of the several gamas men-
tioned by Panini, those that are
marked with mute ट् are prefixed,
, those, marked with क्, are affked,
while those, marked with म , are
placed immediately after the last
voyel of the word. The aug-
ments become a part and parcel
of the word to which they are
added, and the characteristics of
which they possess;cf.यदागमास्तद्गुणी-
भूतास्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यन्त, also आगमानां आगमि-
धर्मवैो|ुष्टयम् Par. Sek. Pari.11. Those
grammarians, who hold the wiew
that words are unproduced and
eternal, explain the addition ofan
augment as only the substitution
of a word with an augment in the
place of a word without an aug-
ment; cf. अदिट्रांस्तर्हमे भविष्यन्ति अनाग-
मकानां सागमका: M. Bh. on I. 1.20;
I. 1.46. The term agama is defined
as अन्यत्र विद्यमानस्तु ये वर्ण: श्रुयतेधिक्रः ;
आगम्यमानतुल्यत्वात्स आगम इति स्मृतः Com.
on Tait. Prt.I. 23.
अागमिन् a base to which an augment
is added: cf. एवमपि पञ्च अागमाख्नय्
आगमिन: M.Bh. I.1. Ahnika 2.
आगर्वाय a class of roots forming a
subdivision of the Curadigana or
the tenth conjugation beginning
with पद् and ending with गई whigh
are only atmanepadin; e.g. पदयत,
मृगयते, अर्थयते, गर्वयंत.
अगस्त्य name of an ancient writer of
Vedic grammar and Pratisakhya
works; cf. R. Pr. I.2.
अाग्रायण्t an ancient scholar of
Nirukta quoted by Yaska cf
ओ अ: i अनक्तेरिति आग्रायणः Nir.
I. 9.
अाङ्क the preposition अ. See the
word आ above. _
अाङ्ग an operation prescribed in the
section, called angadhikara, in the
the Asadhy of Panini, made up
6 five Padas consisting of the
' fourth quarter of the 6th adhyya
and all the four quarters of the
Seventh adhyaya- अङ्गात् पूर्वे द्विचिक्रण
, एषितव्या: M. Bh on I. 3.60 Vart.

अाच
5
5: cf, also वार्णादाङ्गं बलीये भवृति Far.
Sek. Pari 55: also M. Bh. on
III.2.3.
आच् fad. affix आ applied to the
word दक्षिणा and उत्तरा: cf.P.V. 3.36,
38. e. g. दक्षिणा वसति, उत्तरा रमणीयर्म
K. on W.3. 36, 38.
आचार (1) customary usage of putting
or employing words in rules; cf.
आन्वार्याचारात्संज्ञास्तद्वः, P.I,1.1, Vart. 4.
(2) behaviour:cf. उपमानादान्वोर P.III.
1.10; cf also निवासत आवारतश्चM.Bh.
on VI. 3.109.
आचारकिप् denom. affix किप् applied
to any pratipadika or noun in the
sense of behaviour: cf. सर्वप्रातिपदिकेभ्य
' आचारे किब् वक्तब्य: अश्वति गर्दभति इत्यवमर्थम्
M. Bh. on III. !. 11: cf. हृलन्तेभ्य
अाश्वाराक्षबभावाच्च Par. Sek. on Pari.52.
आचार्य preceptor, teacher: a designa-
tion usually given to Panini by
Patanjali in the Mahabhasya; cf.
the usual expression तज्ज्ञापयति आचार्यः
as also अाचायैप्रवृत्तिज्ञोपयति: also cf.
नदानीमाचार्याः सूत्राणि कृत्वा निवर्तयन्ति: cf.
also the popular dcfinition of
अाचायै given as ** निशाम्य यद्विरं प्राज्ञा
अविचार्यव तत्क्षणम् | संभावयान्त शिरसा
तमाचार्यं प्रचक्षते ''
आचार्यदेशीय a partisan of the precep-
tor Panini or the Stºtrakara who is
looked upon as having approx-
mately the same authority as the
. Sutrakara; cf अाचायेदेदीय अाहृ- न
वक्तव्य इति l Kaiyata on I. 4. 105,
Wrt. 2.
आचार्यसंपद् necessary qualification to
teach the Veda with all its paghas
having the necessary knowledge
ofaccents, matris and the like.Cf.
पदक्रमविभागज्ञो वर्णक्रमविचक्षणः स्वरमात्राख्-
षज्ञ गच्छदान्चायैसेपदम् R. Prt.I.8.
आचिताद्ि a class of words headed by
the word अावित which do not have
< their final vowel accented acute.
52
तदर्शक
by P. VI.2. 146 when they are
preceded by the prepositions श्र, परा
etc. although they arc used as
proper nouns. c. g. आचितम् निरुक्तम,
प्रश्लिष्टम्: cf. Ksik on P. VI.2.146.
अाट (1) augment अा prefixed to roots
beginning with a vowel in the
imperfect, aorist and conditional,
which is always acccnted ( उदात्त);
cf. P. VI. 4. 72: (2) augrment अा
prefixed to the imperative first
person terminations, c.g. करवाणि,
केरोथ ctc.: cf. P. III. 4.92: (3) aug-
mcnt अा to be prcfixcd to casc-
affixes which are डित् aftcr nouns
callcd nad: e.g. कुमार्य: cf P. VII.
3.112.
अाटच ad.affix (आट) in the sense of
possession added to the word वाढ;
e.g. वाचाट: cf. P.V.2. 125.
अात् (1) long अा as different from short
or protracted अ prescribed by the
wofd वृद्धि or दीर्ध in the case of अ,
or by the word अात् when substitu-
ted for another wowcl, as for exam-
ple in thc rule आदेच उपदेईs ूिति and
the following: cf. P. VI. 1.45, 57;
(2) substitute for thc ablative affix
डू after words cnding in अ: cf. P.
WI[.1.12; (3) substitutc अात् for a
casc affix in Vcdic ILiterature, c.g.
न ताद् ब्राह्मणाद् निन्दामं HKS. on VII.
1.39.
आताम् Atmanepada third person dual
ending, technically sub:titutcd for
छकार by P. III.4.78
अाति tad. affix अात् applicd to उत्तर,
अधर and दक्षिण by P.V.3.34.
आतिदेदिाक applied by extension or
transfer of epithct as opposed to
औपदेश्ािक्र. Sce the word अतिदेशा; the
term is often uscd in conncction
with rules or operations which do
not apply or occur by the direct
expression of the grammarian; cf
यदेि आतिदशिकेन् क्रित्बेन ओपद्कं fक्रत्वं

अतिज्ञाायक
53
आदिवृद्धि
बाध्यत. M. Bh. on I.2.1.: cf also
अातिदेश्ािक्रमनित्यम् Par.Sck. Pari. 93.6.
आत्ाायिक a tad-affix in the sense
of excellence; a term applied to
the affixes तम and इष्ठ as also तर and
ईयस् prescribed by Panini by the
rules अतिशायने तमबिष्ठनौ and द्विवचनं-
विभज्येपपद तरबीयसुनौ cf. P.V. 3.55, 57.
This superlative affix is seen doub-
ly applied sometimes in Vedic Lit.
eg.श्रेष्ठतमाय कर्मणे Yaj. Safm. I.1; cf.
" also तदन्ताश्च स्वार्थे छन्दसि दईने श्रष्टतमायेति
P.V.3.55 Wart. 3.
आतइााायेकान्त a word ending with an
atisayika affix; cf. अातिदायिकान्तात्स्वार्थे
छन्दसि आतिशाथिक्री दृढयत M. Bh. on V.
3.55.
अरव the substitution of long अा
prescribed by the term अात् as in
अदच उपद्sइित and the following
cf. P. VI.1.45 etc.
आत्मन agent or Kartp as in the terms
अात्मनेपद or अात्मनेभाषा, cf. सुप आत्मनः
क्यच् III. 1.8.
आत्मनपद् a technical term for the
affixes called तड् (त, आताम् etc.) and
the affix अान ( शानच् , चानद्, कानच् ),
called so possibly because, the
. fruit of the activity is such as
generally goes to the agent (आत्मने)
when these affixes are used. Con-
trast this term (Atrnanepada)
with the term Parasmaipada when
, the fruit is meant for another. For
an explanation of the terms see P.
. VI.3.7 and 8.
अात्मनपध्न् a root which always takes
the Atmanepada affixes. (See
above).
अात्मनेभाष a technical term used for
' such roots as speak for the agent
himself; the term अात्मनेभाष means
. the same as the term अात्मनेपदिन्.
The term अात्मनभाष is not mention-
ed by Panini; but the writer of the
Vartikas explains it, cf. आत्मन-
भाषपरलैमभाषयेीरुपसंख्यानम् P. VI. 3.7 and
8 Vart. 1; cf. also आत्मनेपदिनश्च धातवे
वैयाकरणैरात्मनभाषढादन ब्यवाहृयन्त,Kaiyata
on VI.3.7.The term is found in the
Atharva-Pratisakhya. III. 4.7. It
cannot be said whether the term
camein use after Paninior, although
earlier, it belonged to some school
other than that ofPanini or,Panini
put into use the terms Atmane-
pada and Parasmaipada for the
affixes as the ancient termsAtman-
ebhasa and Parasmaibhāsa were in
use for the roots.
अात्व the substitution of अा: e.g. तादृक्,
भवादृकू, अन्यादृक् cf आ सर्वनाम्नं: P.VI.3.
90.
आत्वत् possessed of the vowel आ;
containing the vowel आ: e.gपृकृ:,
द्ायः etc. cf. कर्षौल्घतो घ्ान्त उदात्तःP.VI.
1.159.
अाद्दिक belonging to the second con-
jugation or class ofroots which
begins with the root अद्: cf. दैवादि-
कस्यैव ग्रह्यणं भविष्यति नादादिकस्य Pur.Pari.
67.
अादि (1) commencement, initial: cf.
अपूर्वलक्षण आदिः M.Bh. on I.1.21, (2)
of the kind of, similar; एवंप्रक्रार्:.
आदिकमेन् commencementofan action;
cf. आदिभूतः क्रियाक्षण: अदिकमे Ks . on
आदिकर्मणि क्तः कर्तरि च	P.III. 4.71.
आदित् possessed of the mute indica-
tory letter अा signifying the non-
application of the augment इ (इट् )
to the past- pass. part. term व्रत. e.
g. क्ष्विण्ण from the root ञ्जिक्ष्विदाः simi-
larly खिल, भिज्ञ etc.cf. आदितश्र P.VII.
2.16.
आदिवृद्धि the Vrddhi substitute pres-
cribed for the first vowel of a word
to which a tad-affix, marked with
the mute letter ञ्ज,ण्, or क् is added:
e.g. औपगव, दाक्ष etc.; cf. तद्धितष्वचामाद:
P.VII.2.117, 118.

अादिष्ट 54
आदिघ (1) prescribed for substitution;
specified for an operation : cf. सिद्धे
तु आदिष्टस्य युड्वचनात् M.Bh. on VI.1.
155: cf. also M. Bh. on VI. 1.I58
Vart. 3; M. Bh. on IV.3.28 Vr.
5; cf. also आदिष्टानैवान्वः पूर्वः M. Bh.
on I.1.57; (2) indicated or stated;
अादिष्ट इम बर्ण:.
अदेरा (l) substitute as opposed to
sthanin, the original. In Paninis
grammar there is a very general
maxim, possessed ofa number of
exceptions, no doubt, that * the
substitute behaves like the origi-
nal'' (स्थानिवदादेशाः अनल्विधौ P.I.1.56.) ;
the application of this maxim is
called स्थानिवद्भाव; for purposes of
this र्थानिवद्भावृ the elision (लेप) of a
phonetic element is looked upon
as a sort of substitute;cfः उपधालेपस्य
स्थानिवत्त्वात् Ks. on P. I.1.58. Gram-
marians many times look upon a
complete word or a word-base as
a substitute for another one, alth-
ough only a letter or a syllable in
the word is changed into another,
as also when a letter or syllable is
added to or dropped in a word;
cf. पचतु, पचन्तु ... इमेध्यादेद्दां: | कथम् ?
अादियत यः स आदशा: ' इम चाप्याद्यिन्त
M. Bh. on I.1.56: cf also सर्वं सर्वे-
पददेदा दाक्षीपुत्रस्य पाण्: M.Bh. on P.
I.1.20: cf also अनागमकानां सागमका
अदिशा: M. Bh. on I.1.20: (2) indi-
cation, assignment: cf. वेीये स्वरदेढा:
अन्तेदात्तं, वधेराद्युदात्तत्वं, स्व: स्वरितमिति
अादेदाः P.PrI.80-32; cf. also अादज्ञाः
उपेदरा: com. on Tai.-Prt. II.20:
cf also अनादेशे आक्रार: V.Pr.IV.131,
< where Uvvata remarks यत्र उदात्तादन
ख्राणां सद्धौ अदेङो न क्रियते तत्र अक्षेरं:
प्रत्येतव्यः ， cf also एकारो विभक्त्यादेष्टुः
छन्दसि A.Pr. II. 1.2, where ए is prcs-
cribed as a substitute for a case-
affix and ले and असेम are cited as
examples where the acute acent is
also Prescribed for the substitute ए. }
अाहुदत्त
आदेहान् that for which a substitute
is prescribcd; the original, stha-
nir: cf. अदशिानामादेदा: cf also M.
Bh, On P.I.1.56.
अद्य (1) premicr: cf इदमायै पदरथानं
( द्वयांक्ररणनमेकं ) खिाद्धसोपानपर्वाणाम् Vak.
Pad. I.16; (2) prcceding as oppo-
sed to succeeding (उत्तर ): cf. संहृद्यै-
ब्र्यञ्जनैः V.Pr.I.100 (3) original; cf.
अद्यप्रकृति: परमप्रकृति: (original base)
Bh Vrggi. IV. 1.93; (4) first,
prcccding, अाचे येगे न व्यवाये तिङः स्युः
M.Bh. om III.1-9 ] .
रव अाद्यन्तवद्भाव्र, considcration
of a single or solitary lctter as the
initial or the final omc according
to rcquircments for opcrations
prcscribed for the initial or for
the final. Both thcse notions --the
initial and thc final-arc rclative
notions, and becausc thcy rcquire
the presencc of an additional letter
or letters for the sake of bcing
called initial or final it bccomcs
nccessary to prcscribc अथन्तघद्वध in
the case ofa singlc lcttcr; cf.अाद्यन्त-
वदेकस्मिन् | अादं इच अन्त इध एकस्मिन्नपि
कार्यं भवति यथा कर्तव्यमित्यत्र प्रत्ययाद्युदात्तत्वं
भवति एवमपगचमित्यत्रापि यथा स्यात् [ Ks.
on P.I.1.21 ; cf. also अाद्यन्तधञ्च !
अपृक्तस्य आदेवदन्तवश्च कार्यं भवति	T. Pr.
I.55. This अाद्यन्तवद्भाच of Panini is,
in fact, a specific application of
the general maxim known as
vyapadesivadbhiva by virtue of
which **an operation which affects
something on account of some
special designation, which for
certain reasons attaches to the
lettcr, affects likewise that which
stands alonc:" cf. Pari.Sck. Pari.
30.
आद्युदात्त a word bcginning with an
acute-accent i.e. which has got the
first vowel accented acute: words
in the vocative casc and words
_

आद्युदात्तनिपातन
55
अनि
ormed with an affix marked with
a mute ञ् or न् aredyudatta; cf.P.
VI.1.197, 198: for illustrations in
detail see P. VI.1.189-216.
आद्युदात्तनिपातन specific mention of a
word with the accent u datta or
acute on the first syllable; cf.
आद्युदात्तनिपातनं करिष्यते M.Bh. on I.1.
56, VI. 1.12.
आघार receptacle or abode of an
action:cf.अाश्रियन्ते अाख्मन् क्रिया: इल्याधार:
Ka8. on P. I.4.45 also M. Bh. on
III. 3.121; the Prakriya Kaumudi
mentions four kinds of adhiras: cf.
औपश्लेषिकः सामीपिक्रो विषये व्याप्त इत्याघारश्र-
तुघौ Prak. Kau. on II.3.36.
अाध्ारधेयभ्माव a non-differential rela-
tion (अभदसंसर्ग) between the perso-
nal endings तिप् , तस् etc. and the
noun in the nominative case
which is the subject of the verbal
activity ;relation of a thing and its
substratum: cf. निपातातिरिक्तनामार्थ-
धात्वर्थयोर्भेदान्वयस्य अव्युत्पन्नत्वात्.
आधक्य superfluity, superiority,
notion of surplus; cf यदत्राधिक्यं
त्राक्यार्थः स:M. Bh. on II. 3.46, II.3.
50.
आधूर्षीय a sub-division of roots belon-
ging to the चुरादिगण or temth conju-
gation beginning with धुज् and end-
ing with धृष् which take the Vika-
rana णिच् optionally i.e. which are
also comjugated like roots of the
first conjugation: e.g. यीजयति,येोजयत,
" योजतिः साहृयति-ते, सहृति.
आधेय a thing placed in another or
depending upon another, as oppo-
sed to adhira or the container; cf.
आधेयश्चाक्रियाजश्च सेसत्त्वप्रकृतिर्गण: M. Bh.
on P.IV.1.44.
अन (1) krt.affix (दानव्,or चान्) substi-
tuted for the lakra लट् and appli-
ed to atmanepadi roots forming
the present participle; (2) krt. affix
कानच् applied to atmanepadi roots
in the sense of past time forming
the perfect participle cf. लिट:
क्रानज्वा P.III. 2.103. _
अानङ्क substituteआन्in the place ofthe
last letter (ऋ) of the first member
of dvandva compounds of words
meaning deities or of words show-
ing blood-relationship which end
with the vowel ऋ: e.g. हृोतापोतारी,
मातापितरो cf. P.VI.3.25, 26.
अनन्तये ( 1 ) close proximity; absence
of any intermediary element
generally of the same nature:
अनन्तरस्य ' भाव: आनन्तर्यम्: cf. नाजानन्तर्य
वहृिष्ट्वप्रक्लतिः M. Bh. I.4.2. Vart. 21:
Par. Sek. Pari. 5I. This close proxi-
mity of one letter or syllable or so,
with another, is actually i.e.phone-
tically required and generally so
found out also, but sometimes such
proximity is theoretically not
existing as the letter required
for proximity is technically not
present there by the rule पूर्वत्रांसध्दम्.
In such cases, a technicalabsence
is not looked upon as a fault. cf.
कचिच्च संनिपातकृतमानन्तर्य इाखकृतमनानन्तर्य
यथा धुले, क्रचिच्च नैव संनिपातकृतं नापि
दाख्त्रकृतं यथा जनः | यत्र कुतश्चिदेवानन्तर्य
तदाश्रयिष्यामः M. Bh. on WIII. 3. 13.
( 2 ) close connection by mention
together at a common place etc.:cf.
सर्वाद्यानन्तर्यं कार्यार्थम् M. Bh. on I.1.27.
अानन्द्द्क्त name of a Buddhist
grammarian,	the author of the
work named Candra-Vyakarana
Paddhati.
आनर्थक्य absence of ary utility;
superfluity : absence of any object
or purpose: cf. स्थानिवद्वचनानर्थक्यं शंखा-
सिद्धत्वात् | M. Bh. on P. VI. 1.86
Vart. 5 cf. also P. VI. 1. 158 Vव्रrt.
4; VI. 1. 161 Vart. 1, VI. 1.166
Vrt. 1, VI.1. 167 Vrt. 3.
अानि imp. 1st per.sing affix नि with
the augment अा prefixed, which

आनुक्
has got its न् changed into णु by P.
VIII. 4.16.
आढक् the augment आन्, added to the
words इन्द्र, वरुण, भब and others
before the fem. affix ई: e. g. इन्द्राणी,
वरुणानी cf. इन्द्रवरुणभवद्धिर्वरुद्र... आनुक् P.
IV.1.49.
आनुनासिक्य nasalization: utterance
through the nose, an additional
property possessed by vowels and
the fifth letters of the 5 classcs (ड्,
ऋ, णु, न् , म् ) cf. आनुनासिक्यं तेषामधिक्रीं
गुण: M.Bh. on I.1.9.
आनुपूर्वीं serial order, successive order
of grammatical operations or the
rules prescribing them as they
occur: cf. अानुपूर्या सिद्धमेतत् M.Bh. oh
W. 8. 5 cf. also ययैव वानुपूर्या अर्थानां
प्रादुर्भावस्तयैव इब्दानामपि " तद्वत् कार्यरूप
भर्वितव्यम् M.Bh. on. P. I. 1.57.
आनुपूव्यै successive order, as prescri-
bed by tradition or by the writer:
cf. ऋतुनक्षत्राणामानुपूर्वेण समानाक्षराणां पूर्वनि-
पात: शिशिरवसन्तौ उदगयनस्थौ | कुर्दिक्रां-
रेहृिण्यः | M.Bh. II. 2.34Vart. 8;also
वर्णानामानुपूर्वेण ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविट्शूद्रा:M.Bh.
on II. 2.34 Vºrt. 6: cf. पदानुपूर्वेण
प्रश्लिष्टान् संधीन् कुर्यात् | इन्द्र अा इत़ि ओादौ
इन्द्र आ इत्येतये:: न तु अा इत़ि इयतयः
R. Pr. II. 2, cf also आनुपूव्र्यात् सिद्धम्
SIra. Pari. 6.
आनुपूव्र्यसंहिता the samhiti-ptha or
recital of the running Vedic text
in accordance with the constituent
words;e.g. शुनः शेपं चित् निदितम् or
नरा शंसं व्रां पूषणम्, as opposed to the
हिता which is actually found
in the traditional recital c. g.
शुनश्चिच्छेपं निदितम् Rk sarhh. V 2. 7 6
नरा वा शंसं पूषणम् Rk sarhh. X. 64.3.
. See R. Prt. II 43.
आनुमानिक obtained or made out by
inference such,as Paribhs rules
as opposed to Srauta rules such as
the Stras of Panini; cf. आनुमानिकं
स्थानित्वमवयवयोः K. on VI.1.85,
56
आपत्ति
also cf. आनुमानिक्रस्थान्यादेशभावक्रञ्जनेपि
श्रौतस्थान्यादेशभावस्य न त्याग: Par. Sek.
on Pari. 11: cf. also किं च पूर्वत्रेत्यस्य
प्रत्यक्षत्वेन अानुमानिक्या अस्या बाध एवोचित:
Pari. Sek. on Pari. 50.
अान्तरतम्य closest affinity; cf. अष्टन्-
जनादिपथिमथ्यात्वेषु आन्तरतम्यादनुनासिकप्रसङ्गः
M.Bh. on WII. 2.84, as also अान्तर-
तम्याच्च सद्धम् M. Bh. on VII 1. 96
Vart. 6.
अान्तये proxinity; close affinity ; close
relationship. There are four kinds
ofsuch proximity as far as words
in grammar are concerned : Re: the
organs ofspcech (स्थानतः)as in .दण्डा-
ग्रमु, regarding the meaning(अर्थत:)as
in वातण्ड्ययुवति:, regarding the quality
(गुण) as in पाकः रागः, and regarding
the prosodial valuc (श्रमाण) as ia
अमुष्मै, अमूभ्याम्: cf अनेकविधे अान्तर्य
स्थानार्थगुणप्रमेाणकृतेम् Par. Sck. Pari.13.
cf also KS. on I. 1.50.
अान्पद् word ending with अान् which
has the consonant dropped and
the preceding अ masali2cd: e. g.
सर्गाँ इव सृजतम् Rk.Sarh. VIII. 35. 20,
मई इन्द्र: Rk Sah VI.19.1 ; cf. दीघदटि
समानपाद, अातेsटि नित्थम् P. VIII. 3.9,
VIII. 3.3: cf. also हृन्त द्ध इति तां
अान्-पदः पदवृत्तयः R. Pr. IV. 26, 27.
आप् (l) common term for the fem.
cndings टाप्, डय् and चाप् given by
Panini in Adhy. IV, Pada 1; cf.
अब्यथादाप्सुपः P. II. 4.82. P. IV. 1.1.;
P. VI. 1.68: cf. also P. VI. 3. 63.
P. VII. 3. 44: P. VII. 3. 106,
116; P. VII. 4.15. etc.: (2) a
brief term for case-affixes beginn-
ing with the inst. sing and ending
with the loc. pl. cf. अनाप्यक: P.
VII. 2.112.
अापति (1) production: resulting of
something into another; change;
cf दन्त्यस्य मूर्धन्यापचिितः नतेः मूर्धभ्यापातेः मूर्ध-
न्यभाव: V. Prat. I. 42 and Uvata's
com thereon; cf also यमांपतिं

अपि्रय
57
अाभ्ीयप्रकरण
explained as यमभावे R. Pr. VI. 9.
(2) modification : cf. अापद्यते श्वासतां
नादतां बा R. Pr. XIII. 1.: (3) con-
tingency, undesired result.
आपत्य patronymic affix such as अण्
and others. The term अापत्य, which
is the same as the usual term
अपत्य in तस्यापत्यम् P. IV. I , is
found sometimes used in the
Varttikas and in the Mahabhasya;
cf आयत्याज्ज्ञींवद्वदेयात्स्वार्थे द्वितीये युवसंज्ञ:
P. IV. 1.163 Vart 6.
आपदेव son of अनन्तदेव, the author of
Sphotanirupana (17th cent. A.D.).
(1) a work of अापिद्दालि, possi-
bly his grammar; cf. आपिद्दालमधीते
M. Bh. on IV. 1.14; (2) a student
of ApiSali's grammar: आपिइलमधीते
आपिश्लां ब्राह्मण M. Bh. on IV 1.14:
अापिशलपाणिनीयव्यूडीयगौतमीय: M. Bh.
on VI . 2. 36.; cf. तथा वापिइाल:
पूणिनीयाः पठन्ति-आगमेनुपघातेन विकार-
धेपुमर्दनृत् | आददातु प्रसङ्गेन लेपः
सवांपक्षणात्.
अपिझालि an ancient grammarian
mentioned by Panini and his
commentators like Patafjali, Hel5-
rja and others; cf. वा सुप्यापिशलेः P.
IV. 3.98; तथा वापिढालेर्विधिः M. Bh.
on IV. 2.45. _
अठऋ augment . आप् added to the
words सत्य, अर्थ and वद् before the
अ!
affix णिच्: cf. M. Bh. on III. 1.25 |
and Vart. l and 2 thereou: e. g.
सत्यापयति, अर्थापयति, वदापयति.
अ|्दू augment ( आप् ) suggested in
the place of आपुक् byPatanjali
to be prefixed to the affix णिचुःcf.
M Bh on III. 1. 25.
अाप्य to be obtained by an activity:
(the same as vypya). The term
S used in connection with the
Object of a verb which is to be
obtained by the verbal activity.
The word अाप्य is found used in
the sense of Karman or object in
8
the grammars ofJainendra, Saka-
tayana, Candra and Hemacandra;
cf. Candra II I. 43; Jainendra I.
2. 119; Sk. IV. 3, 120: Hem.
III. 3. 31. Hence, the term सुाप्य
is used for a transitive root in
these grammars.
आबन्त ending with the fem. affix
अा ( टाप्, डाप् or चापू ); cf. वाबन्तः P.
II. 4. 30 Vart. 3.
अबाध्य (1) similarity of one phone-
tic element, for instance, in the
case ofए with आ resulting from
Sarhdhi: e. g. प्रजाया अरातिं निर्वृत्या
अक्रः where प्रजाया and नित्या stand
for प्रज्ञायै and निर्क्यैः cf. एकारान्तानि
अाक्राराबाधे Ath. Pr. II. 1.4; (2) Simi-
larity of accent of words in the
Sarhhitpagha and Padapatha; (3)
followed by cf. A. Pr. II.1.14: (4)
distress: cf. आवाधे च, P. VIII. 1.10.
अभाच्छख a rule given in the sec-
tion called आभीयप्रकरण extending
from P. VI. 4. 22 to VI. 4. 175,
wherein one rule or operation is
looked upon as invalid to another ;
cf. असिद्धवदत्राभात् P. VI. 4. 22 and
M. Bh. thereon; cf. also यावता
अनिदितां हृल: इत्यपि आभाच्छास्त्रम् Wyadi
Pari. 38.
आभीक्ष्ण्य repetition of an action: cf.
पौनःपुन्यं आभीक्ष्ण्यम् Kas. on III. 4.22;
cf. M. Bh. III. 4.24: VIII. 1. 4:
VIII. 1. 12.
अाभीयकायै an operation prescribed by
a rule in the section called अाभीय-
प्रक्ररणं. See अाभ्माच्छाख्त्र above.
आभीयप्रकरण a section of Pचnini's
grammar from VI. 4. -2 to VI.
4. 129, called अाभीय, as it extends
to the rule भस्य VI. 4. 129, in-
cluding it but as the governing
rule भस्य is valid in every rule
upto the end of the Pada, the

आभीयाासद्धत्व
58 अात्रेडित
अभीयप्रकरण also extends upto the
end of the Pada.
above.
आभीयासिद्धत्व invalidity or supposed
invisibility of one rule with
respect to anothcr, in the section
called अाभीयप्रकरण. See अांभच्छिख्त्रि
above.
अाभ्यन्तरप्रयत्न internal effort made
in producing a sound, as col-
trasted with the external One
called बाह्यप्रयत्न. There are four
kinds of internal effor ts described
in the Ksikivrtti.: cf. चत्वार आभ्य-
' न्तरप्रयत्नाः सवर्णसंज्ञायामाश्रयन्त -- स्पृष्टता,
ईषत्स्पृता, संवृतता, विवृतता चति | Kas.
on P. 1.1. 9. See also यत्नं द्विधा !
आभ्यन्तरो बाह्यश्च etc. S. Kau. on
[. 1.9.
अभ्यास changes prescribed in con-
nection with the अभ्यास or redu-
licative syllable; cf. अभ्यासंधकार
अाभ्यास: M. Bh. on III. 1.6.
आम् (1) augment ' आ prescribed in
connection with the words चतुर्
and अनडुहृ before the case-affixes
called सर्वनामस्थान: cf. चतुरनडुहृाराम्
उदात्त: P. VII. 1. 98; (2) the Ta[fix
अम् added before लिट् or a perfect
termination by rules कारप्रत्यथादाम्
अमन्त्रे लिटि and the following (P.
III I. 35-39), as for instancc, in
कासांचके, ऊह्यांचके, दयांचक्र, जागरांचक्रार
fभयांचकार etc.: (3) geni. pl. casc-
affix आम् as in दृषदाम्, इारदाम्, with
न् prefixed in रासाणाम् ctc., and
with ， prefixed in सर्वेषाम् etc.: (4)
sing. दूधू अाम् substituted
or इ ( डि ); cf. डराम् नद्याम्नीभ्यः
P. VI, 4. 116, नद्याम्
आमन्त्रण (I) calling out from a dis-
tance:(2) an invitation which may
or may not be accepted: cf. धिधि-
निमन्त्रणामन्त्रणाधीष्टसंप्रश्नप्रार्थनेषु लिइ P. III.
3.16l whereon M. Bh. remarks अथ
निमन्त्रणामन्त्रणयी: की विशेष: | अथ संनिहृितन
See अ[भाऊछास्त्र [.
_
निमन्त्रणं भबति असंनिहितन अामन्त्रणम् नेबीस्ति
विशेष: | असंनिहिंतनापि निमन्त्रणं भवति सेनि-
हृितनापि चामन्त्रणम् | एवं तर्हि याज्ञयगत:
कर्तव्यं तन्निमन्त्रणम् | अामन्त्रणे कामचारः !
M. Bh. on P. III.3.161.
अामन्त्रित (1) a word in the vocative
sing. cf. सामान्त्रतम् P. II.3.48: a tech.
term in Pini's grammar, the
peculiar featurcs of which are
पराङ्गवद्भाव (cf. P.II.1.2), अवेिद्यमानवद्भाव
(cf. P.VIII.1.72), द्वित्व (cf. P.VIII.
1.8), अद्युदात्तत्च (cf. P. VI.1.198),
सर्वानुदात्तत्व(cf. P. VIII.1.19), splitt-
ing of ए into अा and इ, c. g. अत्रे
into अग्ना 3 इ (cf. P. VIII.2.107
Virt. 3); (2) Vocative case, cf.
अकार् अामन्त्रितज: प्रगृह्य: Rk. Prit. I.28;
Vaj. Pr. III.139: II.17: II.24 VI.1.
अामात्त्रितकारक a word connccted with
the verbal activity possessed by
अामन्त्रित e.g. कुण्डन in कुण्डेनाटन् : cf.
अामन्त्रिते या धातुवाच्या क्रिया तस्याः कारकम्
Kaiyata on P. II.1.2.
| अामन्त्रय a word in thc vocative case;
lit. a word possessed of the sensc
of invocation : cf. अामन्त्रयमाणेर्थे वर्तमान:
ढाद् अामन्त्र्य: Sk. I.3.88; cf. also
अमन्त्रयते यत्तदमन्त्र्यम् com. on Hem.
II. 1.25.
अामिनच् tad. affix अामिन् in the scnse
of possession, applicd to the word
ख: cf. स्व्राभेलैश्वर्य P. V.2.126.
अमिश्र completcly mixcd: cf. अमिश्र-
स्ययमुादेश उच्यते सं नेत्रं पूर्वग्रहणेनु गृह्यते, नपि
पुरप्रहृणेन तद्यथा क्षीरोदकं संपृक्ते आमिश्रत्वा-
कैव क्षीरग्रहणेन ग्रसित नाप्युदकग्रहृणेन M. Bh.
on VI. 1.85; similarly अामिश्रस्थ,
आमिश्रीभूत etc.
अामु tad. affix (अामृ) added to the
affixes घ i. e. तर and तम which are
placed after indeclinables; c. g.
/ किंतराम्, पचतितराम् etc. cf. P. V.4.11.
अत्रेडित ( 1 ) iterative: a repeatcd
word, defined as द्विरुक्तं पद्म्
cf. द्विरुक्तमात्रेडितं पदम् e: g. यज्ञायज्ञा

आत्रेडितसमास
59
अर्धधातुक
चो अग्नये Vaj. Prt. I. 146; (2).
the second or latter portion, of
a repeated word according to
Panini; c. तस्य (द्विरुक्तस्य) परमाव्रीडतम् P.
VIII.1.2. The Amredita word gets
the grave accent and has its last
vowel protracted when it implies
censure: cf. P. VIII.1.3 and VIII.
2.95.Haradatta has tried to explain
how the term अामूडित means the
first member: cf. ननु अात्रेडिताब्दे
निघण्टुषु प्रसिद्धः अात्रेडितं द्विस्त्रिरुक्तमिति |
सत्यमर्थं प्रासद्धः इट् तु इाद परिभाष्यते | महृा-
सेज्ञाकरणं पूर्वाचार्यानुरोधेन Padamafij. on
VIII.1.2.
आत्रेडितसमास an iterative com-
pound: cf. आत्रेडितसमासे तु " A. Prt.
III. 1. 5.
अय् the substitute अाय् for ए before a
, vowel; e. g. वायकः for चै+अक: cf.
एचेायवायाव: P. VI.1.78.
आय (I) the affix आय applied to the
roots √ , , धूप् and others ending
with which they are looked upon
as roots; cf. P. III. 1.28: P. III.1.
32. The affix is applied optionally
when an rdhadhatuka affix is to
follow, e.g. गोपायता, गीता: cf. P. III.
1.31 ; (2) augment: cf. असतो बर्णस्य
उपजन: R. Prt. XIV. 1 Uvata.
अायाम tension of the limbs or organs
producing sound, which is noticed
in the utterance of a vowel which
is accented acute ( उदात्त ) अायामी
गात्राणां दैघ्र्यमाकर्षणं वा ; com. on Tait.
Prt. XXII. 9; cf. ऊध्र्वगमनं गात्राणाम्
वायुनिमित्ते Uv. on R. Prat. III.1: cf
also ऊर्धगमने शरीरस्य com. on Vaj.
Prat. . 3l : cf. also आयामे दारुण्यमणुता
दुर्गा शाब्दस्य M.Bh. on P.
2.29.
अाय्य krt. affix अाय्य before which fण
(causal इ) is changed into अय् ;cf,
अयू अामन्ताल्वाथ्येल्बिष्णुषु P. VI. 4.55.
e.g. रघहृयाय्यः.
अार substitute अार for ऋ in the words
पितृ and मातृ: e.g. पितर्मातरा: cf P.
VI.3.33.
अारक् tad.affix ( अर् ) applied to
the word गेघा in the sense of off*
spring according to the Northern
Grammarians ;e.g. गीधार:, (op-
tional forms गौधेय and गोधेर acc. to
others); cf. P. IV. 1.129, 30.
आरकन् tad. affix applied to the
words शुङ्ग and वृन्द, e. g- शृङ्गारद्व:,
वृन्दारकः ;cf P. शृङ्गवृन्दाभ्यामारकन्, P.V.
2.122 Vव्रrt, 3.
अार्डे KRISHNASHASTRI a re-
puted Naiyayika of Banaras of
the nineteenth century, who
wrote, besides many treatises on
Nyāya, a short gloss on the Stras
of Prini, called Panini-stra-vtti.
अारि tad. afix applied to the word
पूर्वतर when the whole word refers
to a year, e.g.परारि in the last year ;
cf B. V. 3.22 Vrt. 2.
आरु krt.affix applied to thc roots .
and वन्द् in the sense of habituated
etc. e.g. इरारु:, वन्दारु:, cf P. III.
2.173.
अारेप attribution or imputation of
properties which leada to the
secondary sense of a word: cf
अप्रसिद्धश्च संज्ञादिरपि तद्गुणारोपादेव बुध्यतेPar.
Sek. on Pari. 16.
अारोपर्णीय same as अभिनिधान: see above
अाभनिधान.
अार्थ resultant from sense; made up
of sense: अर्थस्य अयम् अार्थ: cf तदा-
दितदन्तत्वमर्थसमाजग्रस्तम् Par. Sek. om
Pari. 37.
आर्थसमाज combination of the mean-
ings (of the base and affix); see the
word अार्थ above.
आर्धधातुक a term used in contrast
to the term सार्वधातुक्र for such ver-
bal and kpt affixes, as are not
personal endings of verbs nor

आर्धधातुका
60
_____ आशीस्
marked with the mute letter 1् !
cf. तिङ्क्त् सार्वधातुक्रम् | अधधातुकं
ईष:	P. III. 4. 113 and 114.
The personal endings of verbs in
the perfect tense and the benedic-|
tive rnood are termcd ardhadha-
tuka, cf. P. III. 4.115, 116; while
both the terms are promiscuously
found utilised in the Vedic Litera-
ture; cf. P. III. 4. 117. The main
utility of the ardhadhatuka tcrm |
is the augment इ ( इट् ) to be
prefixed to the rdhadhituka
affixes. The term अवैधातुक्रा was
in use in works of the old Vaiy-
karanas; cf. अथवा आर्धधातुकासु इति
वक्ष्यामिं कामु आर्धधातुकासु | उक्तिं युक्तिषु
रूढिषु प्रतीतिषु श्रुतिषु संज्ञासु M.Bh. om
II. 4.35. It cannot be said how
the term ardhadhttuka originat.
ed. Probably such affixcs or pra-
tyayas, like the krt affixes gcnc-
rally, as could be placed after cer-
tain roots only were culled ºrdha-
dhatuka, as contrasted with the
verbal and the prescnt participle
afixes which were termed sarva-
dhatuka on account of their
being found in use aftcr every
root.
आर्धधातुका old term for आर्धधातुक्र: sce
आर्धधातुक्र.
आघघातुकाधिकार thc topic or section
in Paninis grammar wherc opc-
rations, caused by the presence
of an ardhatuka affix ahead, are
enumerated, beginning with the
rule आर्धधातुके VI.4.46and ending
with न ल्यपि VI. 4, 69, Such opera-
tions are summed up in the stanza
अते लेीपो यलेीपश्च णिलेपश्चप्रयोजनम् | आतां
इत्वमेत्वं च चिण्वद्भावश्च सीयुटि: M. Bh. as
also Ks, on WI. 4, 46.
आर्षे derived from the holy sages
founded on sacred tradition, such
as the Wedangas;cf. कृत्स्नं च वदाड्मनि-
न्द्यमघम् R. Prt. XIV 80. The word
is explained as स्दयंपाठ by thc com.
on Vaj Prat. IX.2I, and as Vaidika
sarhdhi on X. l}. Patanjali las
lookcd upon thc pada-patha or
Pada-text of the Sarmhits of the
Vcdas, as anara, as contrastcd
with the sarthlaiti text which is
ra; cf. आप्र्याम् in the scnsc रोदितुयुम्
R. Prt. II. 27; cf also पदूरेनुम
लक्षणमनुवत्र्यम् M.Bh. on III. 1. 109.
आर्हय tad-aflixcs टक्, टञ् ctc. as also
the scnscs in which thc allixrs are
applicd, given in thc scction of
Puinis gtatunnar I'. V'. 1. 9-71.
अल्ट् case affix in Vedic literaturc
c.g. वनन्ता थजत Kis. on \'I . ]. 39.
अलच् tad-affix ( आ ) applicd to thc
word ओढ in the sense of *talkativc'
c. g. वाचाल:; cf P. V.2. 121.
अाठ tad. atiix in thc s(:ns(: * तज्ञ {न '
e. g. इीिताध्:, उण्णा: P. V. 4.122.
आठब् kt. affix ( आ ) applicd to
thc roots स्पृदृ, ग्ले़ पत ctc.o.g. सृ:था%.
गृया:, नि:ा: ctc, cf [ III. 2168.
अावचन incompletc pronunciation, cf.
ईषद् वचनम् M.Bh. on I. ]. 8.
अ[वत् tad-affix applicd to the word
सम, cf. समाद् थसत M. ]3h. on
V. 4.30.
अचद्यक nccessary notion or thing:
cf ओर्यकं | अवश्यंभव आवद्यकम् Kas.
on III. 1. 125, III. 3. 170.
अचिटाळङ्ग having a fixed gen-
der as opposcd to अनविटलि:
possessed of all genders; cf. अविश्-
लिङ्गा जातिः | यामुपादाय प्रवर्तते न
,ताछ जह्याति M. Bh. on I. 2. 52
UYe. g. the word प्रमाण in प्रमाणं वेदाः.
अावृत्ति repetition, c. g- पदातिः; scc
com. on Vºj. Prit. IV. 21; cf. also
आवृतितः सूतदात्वं भवति M. Bh. I. 1.
Ahn. 2.
आज्ञिास् the benedictive mood, cf.
क्रिददिषि P. III. 4. 104, called
regularly as आशीर्लिङ्,

आशुबोघ
61
आहिताग्न्यादि
अशुबीघ (1) name of a work on
grammar written by Taranatha
called Tarka-vacaspati, a reput-
ed Sanskrit scholar of Bengal of
the 19th century A.. D. who
compiled the great Sanskrit
Dictionary named वाचस्पत्यकेाढा and
wrote commentaries om many
Sanskrit Shastraic and classical
works. The grammar called अाढवेध
is very useful for beginners; (2)
name ofan elementary grammar
in aphorisms written by रामकिंकर-
सरस्वती, which is based on the
Mugdhabodha of Bopadeva.
आश्रय (1) relation of dependence;
cf. अाश्रयात्सिद्धत्वं भविष्यति M. Bh.
I. 1.12 Vart. 4; (2) substratum,
place of residence: cf. गुणवचनानां
इाब्दानामाश्रयतो लिङ्गवचनानि भवन्ति | शुद्धं
बस्त्रम् ， शुक्ला शाटी | शुढ: कम्बल: t M.
Bh. II. 2. 29.
आश्वलायनप्रतिज्ञाख्य an authoritative
Pratisakhya work attributed to
Saunaka the teacher ofBsvalayana,
belonging prominently to the Sak-
ala and the Biskala Sakhs of the
Rgveda. it is widely known by the
name Rk-PrtiSkhya. It is a
metrical composition divided into .
18 chapters called Patalas, giving
special directions for the proper
pronunciation, recitation and pre-
servation of the Rksarhhita by lay-
ing down general rules on accents
and euphonic combinations and
mentioning phonetic and metrical
peculiarities. It has got a masterly
commentary written by Uvvata.
असून nearest, most proximate: cf.
विक्रार यथासन्नम् V. Pr. I.142: cf. also
the sitra असल: Sak.I.1.7, explain-
ed as स्थानगुणप्रमाणादभिर्यथास्वमासले:: cf.
also अासल: Hem. WII.4.120.
अासचित close proximity of a word
with another: cf. णौ इत्यस्य आसतिवशात्
इत एव सेव्न्ध:	Pari. Bhaskar Pari.
97.
अास्तारपङ्कतं a variety of पङ्कक्ति metre
of 40 letters with 8 letters in the
first and second quarters or padas
and 12 letters in the third and
fourth gmarters cf. अास्तारपङ्कक्तिरा-
दित: R.Pr. XVI. 40. For instances
of आरुतारपङ्कक्ति see Rgveda Sukta 2l,
Mandala K.
अास्थापित (l) placed after, following,
which follow: cf. अस्थथितानामनन्तरो-
व्रतानाम् Uvvata on R. Pr. IV. 1.
(2) properly placed at the end
e.g. सिष्यद् इति सिप्यदे.
अस्य (1) place of articulation, the
mouth, cf. अस्यन्त्यनन वर्णान् इति अास्यम्
M. Bh. on I.1.9; (2) found in
the plaee of articulation; e g. the
effort made for the utter-
ance of words cf.अरेय भवमास्यम् M.
Bh. on I.1.9, also सृष्टादिप्रयत्नपञ्चक-
मारुयम् Laghuvrtti on Sak. I.1.6.
आस्वदीय a sub-division of the चुरादि
(Kth conj.) roots, beginning with
the root ग्रस् and ending with the
root रूद्, which take the Wikarana
णिच् i.e. which are comjugated like
roots of the tenth conjugation,
only if they are transitive in
SenSe.
अादृश्ट् tad-affix (आहृ) in the general
Saisika senses, e.g. belonging to,
produced in, etc., added to the
word उत्तर, e.g. औत्तराहृ cf. उत्तरादाहृञ्
वक्तब्य: ।; M.Bh. on IV.2.104.
अढि tad-affix added to the word
दक्षिण in the general sense of direc-
tion but when distance is specially
meant; e.g. दक्षिणाहिं बसति, ' दक्षिणाहिं
रमणीयम्. See Kas. on आहि च दूरे P.
V. 3.37.
अहिक name of Panini. cf.पााणनिश्चाहुकी
दाक्षीपुत्रः.
अहिताग्न्यादि a class of compound
words headed by the word आइिताले

62
in which the past pass. part.. is
optionally placed first.e.gओहित्:
अयाहृत:: जूतपुत्र:, पुत्रज्ञातः. The class
आहुितायादि s stated to be अतिगण,
cf. Kas.on P.[I.2.37.
इ
इ (1) the vowel इ, representing all its
eighteen forms wiz. shor long
protracted, acute, grave, circu>
iex, pure and nasaliscd eg इn
|्च P.VI.4. 128;(2) Undi affix
ई(3)tad-affix इइ(इ)applied to Bahu-
' #hi compounds in the sense of ex-
changeofaction or asscen in words
11c द्विदण्डि e.g. केदाकेश, दण्डादाड,
द्वभुसाळ etc. cf. ईड् कर्मव्यतिहृरे PW..
127,also V.4,128: (4) krt. affix कं
(ट्) cf. उपसर्गे घोः केिः P.HII.3.92 (5)
augment इट् (इ); sce इट् (6) con-
jugational affix इद् of the 1st pers.
sing. Atm.
इक् (1) short wording (प्रत्याहृतार्) for the
vowels इ, उ, ऋ and ल्: cf इको यणचि
P. VI.1.77ः एच इग्घ्रस्वाददे P. I.1.48;
इकः गुणवृद्धी P. I.1.8 इग्यणः संप्रसारणम् P.
I.1.45, इक्रोsसवर्ण शाकल्यस्य इस्डश्च P.VI.
1.127,इक्रो हृस्बोSडयेो गालवस्य P. WI.3.
61: (2) krt. affix इकू (इ) applied to
the root form to cite a root e. g.
वदि, जनि etc. cf. इक्रश्तिपौ धातुनिदेऊो P.
III.3.108 Vart. 2: (3) krt. affix इकू
applied to the roots क्ष् and others
in the sense of verbal r activity
e.g. कृधि:, क्रिरिः, गिरिः cf. इक् कृष्यादिभ्यः
PIII. 3.108 Vart.8.
इक्परिभाषा the Paribhas rule इर्की
गुणवृद्धी P.I.1.3; cf. गुणश्रुत्या इक्परिभाषे-
पंथनात् इकः एव स्थाने गुणे यथा स्यात् Sra-
deva. Pari.93.
इक (1) substitute for the affixठ given
as ठक्, ट् or ञ्जिठ by Panini; cf.
ठस्येक्र: P.VII.3.50; (2) taddhita
affix इकक्, इकन् धिक्रतू mentioned in .
the Wartikas on P.IV.2.60; (3) krt.
इङ्गघ
affix इक applied to खन् e.g. आखानक्र:
cf. इको वक्तव्यः P.III.3.125 Vart. 3.
इकक् the sameaffix as ठक् mention-
ed by the वार्तिकक्रार in the Vartikas
on P. [V. 2.60.
इक्रन् tad. affix इक applied to com-
pound words with पद as the latter
imember e.g. पूर्वपादक: cf इकन्पदोत्तर-
पदात् P.IV.2.60 Vart.
इकबक krt. affix applied to खन् e.g.
अाखनिक्रबक्र: cf इकबकं वक्तव्यः P. III.
3.125 Vart. 4.
इकार the letter इ with all its 18
varieties (इ +कर).
इक्पदोपस्थिति the presence of the word
इकू (vowels इ, उ, ऋ and ल) in a
rule, where the operations गुण and
वृद्भ are prescribed by putting the
words गुण and वृद्धि: e.g. सिचि वृद्धिः
परस्मैपदेषु P.VII.2.1; cf. इको गुणवृद्वी
P.I.1.3.
इग्लक्षणवृद्धि the substitution of the
vowel called वृद्वि i.e. the vowel आ,
ए or औ prescribed specifically for
the vowels called इक् i. c. इ, उ, ऋ
and ल्, e.g. तस्मादिग्लक्षणा वृद्वि: P.1.1.3.
Vart. 11; cf.also इग्लक्षणवृद्धिप्रतिषेधस्तावत्
Siradeva Pari. 2.
इङ्ग the same as इङ्गय. See below. The
word इङ्ग is used for इय in the
Atharva Prtisºkhya cf. नीहृाराादेष्वभि-
ङ्गपूतरपदे दीर्ध इषु च A.Pr. III. 3.12.
इङ्गय a separable word as opposed to
अनिड्य; part of a compound word
which is separated or may be
separated from the remaining part
when the word is split up into its
constituent parts. Generally the
word is applied to the first part of
a compound word when it is split
up in the recital of the padapatha.
The fingya word is shown by a
pause or avagraha after it which
is shown in writing by the sign (S):
cf. इङ्गयेत विभागेन चाल्यते इति इङ्गयंम् |
इङ्गयमिति विभागपदस्य संशा com.on Tait.

इच्
Prat. 1. 48. सावग्रहं पदमिङ्गयम् Com.on
T.Pr. I.48.
इच् (l) short wording or pratyhra
for vowels except अ. cf. इजदश्च'
गुरुमतेोSनृच्छः P.III. 1.36; cf also VI.
I.104, VI. 3.68. VIII.4.31,32: (2)
Samasanta affix इ after Bahuvrihi
compounds showing a mutual ex-
change of actions. e.g. केदाकेशि,
दण्डादण्डि: cf. इच् कर्मव्यतिहारे P.V.4.
127 also 128.
इऩ् (l) krt. affix (इ), in the sense of
werbal activity applied to any root,
the word so formed being used in
the fem. gender and in connection
with narration or in interrogation;
e.g. कां त्वं कारिमकार्षाः | सर्वं कारिमकार्षम्
cf. Panini III.3.110: (2) krt. affix
in the sense of verbal activity
applied to the roots वप् and others
e.g. वापिः, वासि: etc. cf. P.III.3.108
Wart. 7;(3) tad-affix इ in the sense
of offspring applied to a noun
ending iu अ; e.g, दाक्षि: cf. P.IV. 1.
95-7, 153.
इद् (l) augment इ eprfixed,in general ]
in the case of all roots barr-
ing a few roots ending in vowels
except ऊ and ऋ and roots इक्, पच्,
etc., to such affixes of non-conjuga-
tional tenses and moods as begin
with any consonant except ' and य्;
cf. आर्धधातुकस्येड् वलादेः P.VII.2.35 to
78 and its exceptions P.VII.2.8 to
34: (2) personal ending of the
third person sing. Atm.
ए (l) short wording or pratyahara
for all vowels except अ and the
consonants हु, , , , ब्: cf. इणः ष:
P. VIII.3.39,also P.' VIII.3.57,78
(2) krt. affix इ applied to roots
such as अज् अत् etc. in the sense of
verbal activity.e.g आजिः,अति:, आदि:
cf.इणजादिभ्यः P. III.3,108, Vart.6.
इत् (1) a letter or a group of letters
attached to a word which is not
63
इत्
seen in actual use in the spoken
language: cf अप्रयोग इत्, SakI.1.5,
Hem.1.1.37. The इत् letters are
applied to a word before it, or
after it, and they have got each of
them a purpose in grammar vi2.
causing or preventing certain
grammatical operations in the
formation of the complete word.
Panini has not given any defini-
tion of the word इत् , but he has
mentioned when and where the
vowels and consonants attached to
words are to be understood as इत्;
(cf. उपदेशेजनुनासिक इत् , हृलन्त्यम् | etc.
P. I. 3.2 to 8) and stated that
these letters are to be dropped in
actual use, cf. P.I. 3.9. It appears
that grammarians before Panini
had also employed such इत् letters,
as is clear from some passages in
the Mahabhasya as also from
their use in other systems of
grammar as also in the Undi list
of affixes, for purposes similar to
those found served in Panini 's
grammar. Almost all vowels and
consonants are used as इत् for
different purposes and the इत्letters
are applied to roots in the Dh∂-
tuptha, nouns in the Ganapatha,
as also to affixes, augments and
substitutes prescribed in grammar.
Only at a few places they are
attached to give facility of pronun-
ciation. Sometimes the इत् letters,
especially vowels, which are said
to be इत्,when uttered as nasalized
by Panini, are recognised only by
convention; cf. प्रतिज्ञानुनासिक्याः पाणि-
नीयाः(S.K.on P.I.3.2).The word इत्,
which literally means going away
or disappearing, can be explained
as a mute indicatory letter. In
Panini's grammar, the mute vowel
अ applied to roots indicates the
. placing of the Atmanepada affixes

इन् 64
after them, if it be uttered as anu-
datta and of affixes of both the
padas if uttered svarita; cf. P.i.3.
12, 72. The mute vowel अा signi-
fies the prevention of इडागम before
the past part, affixes; cf. P. VII.
2. 16. Similarly, the mute vowel इ
signfies the augment न्after the last
vowel of the root: cf.P.VII.1.58; ई
signifies the prevention of the aug-
ment इ before the past part.affixes
cfP.VII.2.14;उ signifies theinclu-
sion of cognate letters; cf.P.I.1.69,
and the optional addition of the
augment इ before स्वा: cf. P. VII.2.
96; ऊ signifies the optional appli-
cation of the augment इट्;cf.P.VII.
2.44; त signifies the prevention of
व to the vowel of a root before
the causal affix, cf.VII.4.2: ल sig-
nifies the Wikaranaअङ्क in the Aorist
cf P.III.1.55; ए signifies the pre-
vention ofWrddhi in the Aorist,cf.
P.VII.2.55; ओो signifies the substi-
tution of न for त् of the past part.
cf P WIII.2.45; क् signifies the
Prcvention ofगुण and वृद्वि, cf. P, I.
1.5 ， signifiesthe addition of the
augment मुम्(म्)and the shortening
of the preceding vowel: cf.P.VI.3
%-66: गु signifies the prevention of
ण्ण and वृद्धि, cfP. I.1.5 व् signifies
ई, cf, PWII.3.62; डु, applied to
affixes, signifies the prevention of
शु'ण and वृद्व: cf. P.I.1.5; it causes
|्प्रसारणाददा in the case of certain
Footश्, cf F. VI.1.16 and signifies
आत्मनेपद if applied to roots; .P. .
?-12, and their substitution for the
last letter if applied to substitutes.
cf P I.1 58. च् signifies the acute
accent of the last vowel:cf.P.VI.1.
l99; ， signifies उभयपद् i.e the plac-
ing of the affixesof both the podas
after the root to which it has been
affixed;cfP.I.3.72, द् in the case of
an augmentsignifiesitsapplication
इतच्
to the word at the beginning: cf.P
I. 1.64, while applied to a nominal
base or an affixshows the addition
of the fem. affix ई (डुप्) cf.P.IV.1.
15;ड् signifies the elision of the last
syllable; cf. P.VI.4.142: गु signifies
वृाद्व, cf.P.VII.2.115;त् signifiesरवरित
accent, cf. WI.1.18l, as also that
variety of the vowel ( हृस्व, दधे or
प्रित) to which it has been applied
cf. P.I.1.70; न् signifies आद्युदार, cf.
P.VI.1.193:प significs अनुदात्त acccnt
cf. अनुदात्तौ सुप्पितौ P. III. 1.4. as
also उदात्त for the vowel bcfore the
affix marked with पृ cf. P.VI.1.192:
म् signifies in the case of an aug-
ment its addition after the final
vowel.cf.P.i-l.47,while in the casc
of a root, the shortening of its
vowel before thc causal affix णि,cf.
P.VI.4.92: र् significs the acute
accent for the pcmultimatc vowel
cfP.VI.1.217 ， significs the acute
accert for the vowcl prcccding
the affix markcd with : cf.P,VI.
193 य् implies in the casc of an
affix its सार्वधातुकत्व: cf. P. II1.4.113,
while in the case of substitutcs,
their substitution for thc whole
स्थानिन् cf P.I.1.55 र् significs the
addition of the fem. affix ई ( डी )
cf.P.IV-1.41 ;य् in thc casc ofafixes
signifies पदज्ञा to thc basc before
them, cf P.I.4.16. Somctimcs even
without the actual addition of the
mute letter, affixes arc directed to
be looked upon as possesscd of that
mute letter for the sake ofa gram-
™atical operation e.g. सार्वधातुकमपित्
PI.2-4; असंयेागााछट क्रितं P. 12.5: गेतां
णित् P.VII.1.90 etc. (2) thc short
vowel इ as a substitute: cf. इास
इदङ्कहृलेी: P. VI. 4. 34.
↑ tad, affix इत in the sense of
'found or produced in', which is
afixed to words तारका,पुष्पं, मुकुल and

_K
इतरतर
65
इनि
' others; 6. g. तारकित, मुकुलित, सुावत,
दुःखित etc.: cf. तदस्य संजातं तारकादिभ्य
इतव् P. V. 2. 36.
" इतरेतर possessed of interdepende-
nce; depending : upon each
other: cf. इतरतरं कार्यमसद्धेतुं Candra
Pari. 5 }. Grammatical operations
are of no avail if the rules stating
them are mutually depending
on each other. The word इतरेतर्
has the sense of इतरेतराश्रय here.
इतरेतरयोग mutual relationship with
each other. Out of thefour senses
of the indeclinable च viz. समुचय,
अन्वाचय, इतरेतरयोग and समाहृ|र, the
IDvandva compound is formed of
words connected in the last two
ways and not in the first two
ways. The instances of द्वन्द्व in
the sense of इतरेतरयोग are धबख-
दिरपळशा:, प्लक्षन्यग्रोधौ etc ; cf. ks.on
P. II. 2.29 cf. also क्षश्च न्यग्रोधश्चत्युक्ते
गम्यत एतत्प्रेक्षेपि न्यग्रोधसहायेसः न्यग्रोधेपि
ऋक्षसह्यय इति M. Bh. on II. 2. 29; cf.
also इतरेतरयेगः स यदा उद्रिक्तावयवभेदो
भवाते Siradeva Pari. 16.
इतरेतराश्रय depending upon each
other; cf. इतरेतराश्रयाणि च कार्याणि न
प्रकल्पन्ते | तद्यथा | नौनधि बद्व नतर-
तरत्राणाय भवति | M. Bh. on I.1.1. |.
See इतरतर above.
इत्कार्य a grammatical operation caus-
ed by इत् i. e. by a mute letter
which is purely indicatory; cf. एवं
तर्हि इत्कार्याभावादत्र इत्संज्ञा न भविष्यति M.
Bh. I. 3.2. See इत् above.
इच्व the substitution of short इ by
स्याघ्वोरिच P. I. 2.17, शास इदङ्कहृले: P.
VI. 4. 3, etc.
, इत्थंभूतलक्षण characterization; indi-
cation by a mark: e. g. जटाभ-
रुतापस: cf. इत्थंभूतलक्षणे व ( तृतीया ) P.
II. 3.21.
्ठ krt affix mentioned by Panini in
WI.4.55 as causing the substitution
9
. of अय् for णि before it: e. g गदयित्नु:,
स्तनयित्नु: M.Bh. on WI. 4.55.
इत्र kt affix, added to the roots ऋ,
ल्, धू etc. in the sense of instru-
rnent cf. अर्तिलूधूसूखनसहचर इत्रः P. III.
2. 184-6. e. g. अरित्रम् , लवित्रम् खनित्रम्
etc. The words ending in इत्र have
got the acute accent on the last
syllable: cf. P. VI, 2. 144.
इत्संज्ञक a letter which is termed इत्;
See इत् above.
इथऋ augment इथ् , e. g. यावतिथः, ताव-
तिथ:: cf. बतेरिधुक् P. V. 2. 53.
इदित् possessed of the mute indicatory
letter इ; e. g the roots नदि, विदि
and the like, in whose case the
augment नुम् ( न् ) is affixed to the
last vowel; cf इदिते नुम् धातेः P.
VII. 1 . 58. _
इन ( 1 ) krt affix इ applied to the
roots कृ, हृ, ग्रहृ, and भ् when they
are preceded by certain words like
रेतम्ब etc. in certain senses; e. g.
रुतम्बक्ररे:, फलेग्रहिः, अात्मंभरिः; cf. P. III.
2. 24-7;(2) kt affix इन् (णिनि) pres-
cribed by P. III. 3.170 e. g. अवदयं-
क्रारी, ऋतंदार्यी.
इन ( l ) substitute for the inst. case
ending in अा (ट) after bases ending
in अ ; cf. टाडसिडसामिनात्स्याः P. VII. 1.
12: (2) tad.aff इन affixed to पूर्वे e.
g. पथिभिः पूर्वेणैः cf. P. IV. 4. 133.
इनड् substitutc इन् for the last vowel
of the words कल्याणी, सुभगा, दुभेगा and
others before the affix ढ i. e. एय
preseribed after these wordsi n the
sense of offspring e. g. काल्यााणनेयः,
सौभागनेयः, क्रौलेटिनयः etc.cf.कल्याण्यादीना-
मिनङ्क P. IV. !. 126, 127.
इनच् tad. affix इन in the sense of poss-
ession applied to the word fन which
is changed into चिक्र, e. g. चिक्रिन::cf.
इनडु पिट्टु चिक्राच च P.V. 2. 33.
इनि ( 1 ) krt affix इन् applied to the
roots क्री with धि, जु with श्र, and the

इनुण्
roots जि, दृ, क्षि and others, e 8
सेमविक्रय, प्रजेवी, जयी etc. cf '. III
2. 93 and III. 2. 156-157: (2) tad.
afix इम् affixed to the word पाण्डुकम्बल
in the sense of covered with' ( cf.
P, IV.2.11), in the sense of collec-
tion to the word खल e. g. खलिन cf
P. IV. 2. 51, to the word अनुब्राह्मण
in sense * student of e. g. अनुब्राह्मणी
cf. P. IV. 2. 62, to the words कर्मन्द
and कृढाश्च cf. P. IV. 3.l l l, to the
word चूर्ण cf P.IV. 4. 23 and to the
word श्राद्ध cf. P.W. 2, 83 and साक्षात्
cf. P. V. 2. 91 in specified senses
and in the general sense of posse-
ssion to words ending in अ, cf P.
W.2.115-117 and to certain other
words cf. P. V. 2. 128-37.
इनुण् krt affix इन्. by P. III. 3, 44
followed invariably by the tad,
affix अण् by P. V. 4, 15, e. g, सांरा-
विणम् , सांकूटिनम्.
इांद्रापाते author of 'परीक्षा' a com-
mentary on the Paribhagendu-
Sekhara of Nagesabhatta,
इन्दुमत्र author of अनुन्यास, a .com-
mentary on Nyasa, the well-known
commentary on the fKsikavrtti by
" Jinendrabuddhi. Many guotations
from the Anunyasa are found in
the Paribhagvrtti of Sradeva.
The word इन्दु is often used for
इन्दुमित्र: cf. एतस्मिन् वाक्य इन्दुमैत्रेययेो:
शाश्वतिकं विरोध: Sira. Pari. 36.
इन्दुप्रकारा author of a commentary
on the Paribhasendusekhara.
इन्द्र name of a great grammarian who
is believed to have written an ex-
haustive treatise on grammar
before Pahini; cf the famous verse
of Bopadeva at the commence-
ment of his Dhitupatha इन्द्रश्चन्द्र:
काशकृत्स्नापिशलीं दाक्रटायन: । पणिन्यमरजेनेन्द्रा
जयन्त्यष्टादिशाब्दिका: || No work of
Indra is available at present.
He is nowhere quoted by
66 इमन्
Panini. Many guotations believ-
ed to have been taken from his
work are found scattered in gram-
mar works, from which it appears
that there was an ancient system
prevalent in the eastern part of
India at the time of Panini which
could be named एन्द्रव्याकरणपद्धति,
to which Panini possibly refers by
the word प्राचाम्. From references,it
appears that the grammar was of
the type of प्रक्रिया, discussing vari-
ous topics of grammar such as
alphabet, coalescence, declension,
context, compounds , derivatives
from mouns and roots, conjuga-
tion, and changes in the base.
The treatment was later on follow-
ed by Sakatyana and writers of
the Katantra school.For details see
Mahabhasya ed. by D. E. Society,
Poona, Vol. VII pages 124-127.
इन्द्रदत्त author of the * Gidhaphakki-
kprakasa', a gloss on the difficult
passages in the Mahabhisya.
इप् a technical term for द्वितीया (accu-
sative case ) in the Jainendra
grammar; cf. कर्मणीप् Jain. 1.4.2.
ईप् a technical term in the Jainen-
dra Vyakarna for सप्तमीं (the loca-
tive case).
इफ tad, affix applied to र ( letter र् )
in the sense of the consonant : e.
g. रफः: cf. रादिफ: P. III. 3. 108
Vart. 4.
इम augment इ added to the base तृणहृ,
after the last vowel, e. g. तृणढि: cf.
तृणहृ इम् P,VII. 3. 92.
इमन् or इमनिच् tad. affix इमन् applied
to the words gधु, मृदु, महृत्, लधु, गुरु,
words showing colour and words
such as दृढ, परिवृढ, भृश, इीित, उष्ण etc.
in the sense of fguality' or *attri-
bute': cf Pan. V. 1.122, 123. For
changes in the base before the
, affix इमन् see P. VI.4.154-163.

इमप्
इमए krt. affix इम applied to words
showing भाव or verbal activity;
e.g. पााक्रमम् , त्यागिमम्;cf भावप्रत्ययान्तादि-
मब्वक्तव्य: K8. on P. IV.4.20.
इय tad affix ( घन् ) in the sense of
*pity': e. g. देविय:, यज्ञिय:: cf. P. IV.
2. 79.
इयडू substitute for the last इ
before a vowel generally in the
case of monosyllabic roots end-
ing in इ and the word खत्री:
e. g. चिक्षियु:, नियौ निय, स्त्रियौ स्त्रियः
cf अचि क्षुधातुभुवां य्वोरियङ्कबडौ P. VI.
4. 77-80.
इया case-ending for inst. sing. in
Wedic Literature; e. g. उर्विया,
दार्विया: cf. P. VII. 1.89. and Vव्रrt.i
thereom.
इर् nute indicatory ending of roots, !
signifying the application of the ;
aorist sign अ.( अङ्क ) optionally;e g.
अभिदत् or अमैत्सीत् from the ro6t ;
भिद् ( भिदिर् in Dhtupatha) cf.
als6 अच्छिदत्,अच्छेत्सीत from छिद्(छिदिट्);
cf. P. III. 1.57. '
इरच्， tad. affix C इर् ) in the sense of
possession applied in Vedic Lite-
rature to रथ e. g. रथिरः: cf. P. V. ]
2. ]09 Wart. 3.
इरन tad. affix ( इर ) in the sense of
possession applied in Vedic Lite-
rature; to मध e. g, cf. P. मधिरः
W. 2.109 Wart. 3.
इरित a root ending with mute indi-
catary ending इर्. See इर्.
ईरे ( ईर् ) substitute for the perfect
3rd pers ， pl. Atm. affix इ: e. g.
चाक्रर, ऊचिर etc.; cf. P. III. 4.81.
इल tad, affix applied to the words
काश, अश्वत्थ, पलाश and others in the
four senses prescribed in P. IV.
2.67-70; . e. g. काशिल:, अश्वत्थिल:,
पलाशैल:: cf. P. IV. 2.80.
इलच् (I) tad. affix इल (इलख) in the
sense of pity; e. g. देवियः, यज्ञिल:: cf.
67
, इष्ठ
P.IV.2.79. The tad.affix घन् is also
affixed in the same sense. See इय.
(2) tad. affix इल (इलच्) in the sense
of possession, prescribed after the
words पेन, लेमन् कपि, सिकता, इार्करा,
तुन्द, उदर्, घट, यव etc.: e. g. पेनिल,
लोमिल, क्रपिल, सिकतिल तुन्दिल etc. cf.
P. V. 2.99, 100, 105, 117.
इर् substitute for इदम् before an
affix called *vibhakti': e. g. इहृ: cf:
P. V. 3.3.
इष्ट a word frequently used in
the Warttikas and the Mahabh-
asya and other treatises in the
senses of .(I) a desired object,
(2) a desired purpose, (3) a
desired statement, (4) a desired
form i. e. the correct form : cf.
इष्टान्वाख्याने खल्वपि भवतिः M. Bh. I.1.
Ahn. I. योगविभागादिष्टसिद्धिः Pari.Sek.
Pari. 114.
इष्टतन्त्रव्याकरण a short treatise on
grammar ascribed to.Jayadeva.
इष्टादि a class of words ， headed by
the word इष्ट to which the taddhita
affix इन् ( इनि ) is added in the
sense of अनन i. e. * by him' i. e.
by the agent of the activity de-
noted by the past pass. participles
इष्ट and others cf. इष्टो यज्ञ, पूर्त श्राद्धे
etc. Kas, on P. V. 2. 88.
इटि a word generally used in the
' statements made in the Mah-
bhasya, similar to those of the
Sutrakra and the Varttikakaras,
which are desired ones with a
view to arrive at the correct
forms of words: cf. प्रातिज्ञो देवानां-
प्रियो न त्विारः,	इष्यत एतद् रूपमिति
M. Bh. on II. 4.56.
इष्ठ the superlative tad. affix इष्ठन् in
the sense of अतिशायन or अतिदाय
( excellence ). The commentators,
however, say that the taddhita
affixes तम and इष्ठ,like all the tadd-
hita affixes showing case-relations,

इष्ठन्
are applied without any specific
sense of themselves, the affixes
showing the sense of the base itself
( स्वार्थे ): e. g गुरुतम:, गरिष्ठः: पद्धतमः,
पठिष्ठः: पचतितमंम्, कंवृतमः, क्ररिष्ट: etc.: cf.
P. V.3. 55-64 The affixes ईयस् and
इष्ठ are applied only to such subst-
antives which denote quality: cf.
P. V. 3. 58.
इष्ठन् the same as इष्|. See इष्，.
इष्ठवद्भाव possession of the same pro-
perties for causing grammatical
operations as the tad. affix इष्ठन्
possesses, as for instance, the elision
of the syllable beginning with the
last vowel ( टिलेप ), substitution of
the masc. base for the fem. base
( पुंवद्भाव ) etc., before the denom.
|
68
affix णेिच्: e. g. एतयति in the sense
of एन आचेष्ट: similarly प्रथयति, पटयात, !
दवयतिं, cf M. Bh. on. P. VI 4.
155 Vart, 1.
इणु kt affix इष्णुच् applied,in the sense
of ' possessed of habitual behavi-
our action, or splendid accomp-
lishment,' to the roots अलंक्, निराकृ,
प्रज्न् उत्पृत् etc. e.g अलंकरिष्णुः,उत्पतिष्णु:,
सहिष्णु:,वरिष्णुः etc.:cf.P.III 2.1 ?6-138.
ktaffix in Wedic Literature in the
sense of the infinitive, e. g. रेड्ष्यैि,
अव्यथिष्यै: cf P. III. 4.i0.
इस्र् ( l ) substitute इस् for the vowel
of the roots, मी, मा, दा, धा, रभु, पत् etc.
before the desiderative aifix सन्:
e. g. मित्सति, दित्सति, अारिप्सत etc. cf.P.
VII. 4.54; ( 2 ) undi affix इम् e. g.
सर्षिसृ.
<
इस्ठच् alternative affix mentioned in
the Mahabhasya in the place of
इष्णुच् ; cf M. Bh.on III. 2.57. See
इष्णुच् .
c
ई
ई the long vowel ई which is techni-
cally included
in the vowel _
c
इट्
इ in Panini's alphabet being
thc long tone of that vowel; (2)
substitute ई for the vowel अा of
the roots श्रा and म bcfore the
frequentative sign यङ्क as for ex-
ample in जव्रीयत, देनीयत, cf. P. VII.
4.31 ; (3) substitute ई for the
vowel अ before the affixes वि and
क्यच् as, for instance, in शुक्रीभवति,
पुत्रीयति etc.; cf.. P. VII. 4.32, 33;
(4) substitute ई for the vowel अां
at the end of reduplicatcd bases
as also for the vowel अ of bascs
ending in the conjugational sign
ना, e.g. मिमीवे, लुनीत: etc.; cf P.VI.
4. l l 3; (5) substitute ई for the
loc. case affix इ ( ङि ) in Wedic
Literature, e.g. सरसीं for सरसि in दृतं
न गृह्णकं सरसीं इयानम्,: cf. Kas. on P.
VII. 1.39: (6) tad. affix ई in the
sense of possession in Wcdic Litera-
ture as for instance in रथी:,सुमङ्गलीः,
cf. Ks on. P. V. 2.109: (7) the
fem. affix ई ( डीप् , डीप् or इन् ): cf.
P. IV. 1.5 8, 15-39, IV. 1.40-65,
IV. 1.13.
ईक tad. affix ईश्र्कक addcd to इति
and यटि e. g. शाक्तीकः fem. इानीक्री;
थाटीकः; cf. P. IV. 4.59; (2) tad. affix
ईक added to कर्क and लेति in the
sense of comparison, e. g. काक्रfकः,
लैहृतीक्रः ( फटिक: ), cf. Kas. on P. V.
3.1 10: (3) tad. affix ईक्क added to
वृद्,ि e. g. बाईक: : cf. बर्हिषटिलेपे यश्च,
ईकच P. IV.1.85. Vart. 4-5; (4) tad
affix इक् in Vedic Literaturc added
to हिंस् e.g. बार्हीक्र: cf Kas.on P. IV.
1.85,Vart.6; (5) tad. affix ईकन् addcd
to खांरी e. g, द्विखारक्रम् , cf. P. V.
1.33. _
ईद् augment ई prefixed to a Sarvad-
htuka (strong) affix beginning
with a consonant after the roots
, रु, सु, and others e. g. अनवीतु,
रोरवीति, स्तवीति, अकार्षीत्, अर्वादीत् etc
cf. P. VII. 3.93-98.

ईत्
ईत् long vowel ई as different fron
इ or ई prescribed as a substitute;
cf. P. VI.3.27, VI.8.97.
ईदृत् ( a root ) possessed of long ई as
a mute indicatory ending meant
, for prohibiting the addition of the
augment इ to the past part. ter-|.
minations त and तवत् ; e. g. लग्न:,
दात: etc.: cf. P WII. 2, 14,
ईप्सित a desired object, which, in con-
' nection with transitive roots, gets
the designation कर्म,when the agent
has a keen desire for it; cf. कंतुरी-
प्सिततमं कर्म P. I. 4. 49.
ईमसख् tad. affix ईसस added to the
word मल in sense of possession:
e. g. मलीमस:, cf. P. V. 2.114.
ईय substitute for the tad.afix छ; e.g:
इतालीय:, मलय: etc: cf P. VII. 1.2
and IV. 2, 114.
ईयङ्क afix ईय added to the root ऋत्,
इ showing the application of the
Atmanepada affixes; e. g. क्रतीयत:
cf. P. III. 1, 29
ईयस् tad-affix ईयसुन् , showing superi-
ority or excellence of one indivi-
dual over another in respect of a
9uality, added to a substantive ex-
presive of quality; when the subst-
antive ends in the affix तृ, that aHix
वृ is removed: e.g. पटीयान्, लघीयान,
गरयान्, देईयसी (धेनुः) cf.P.V.3.57-64.
ईयसुन् the same as ईयस् which see
above.
ईरच् tad-affix added to the word अण्ड
in the sense of possession: e.g.
अण्डोर:;cf. काण्डाण्डादीरनीर् P.V.2.11 I.
ई， substitute ई for इदम् before the
tad-affixes दृक्, दृढ and वतु: e.g. ईदृढ
ईदृढाः also ईदृक्षः: cf. P.VI,3.90
ईश्वरकान्त author of *Dhatumla', a
short metrical treatise on roots.
ईश्वरानन्द् author of (l) a gloss on
Kaiyata's
?
Mahabhasya-pradipa, |
69 उ
and (2)an independent treatise Sab-
dabodhataranginf. He is believed to
have been a pupil of सत्यानन्द and
iived in the latter part of the 16th
century A.D.
च्स an external effort ( बाह्य-प्रयत्न)
in the production of sound charac-
torized by the emission of breath,
when the cavity made by the cords
of the throat is kept wide apart,
as found in the utterance of the
consonants ;ं, व् and स.
ईषत्स्पृष्ट an external effort ( बाह्यप्रयत्न)
in the production of sound charac-
torized by only a slight contact of
the cords of the throat, made in the
utteranee ofsemi-vowels cfईषत्स्पृष्ट-
मन्त:स्थानाम् S.K. on P.I.1.9.
ईषदसमाप्ति stage of the quality of a
thing or of an undertaking which is
almost complete,to show which,the
tad-affixes कल्प, दय and देशीय are
applied to a word:e.g. पट्कल्पः,पट्दय.:
पदुदेीियः, पचातेक्रल्पम्, जल्पतिकल्पम्, cf. P,
W.3.67.
ईषन्नाद् an external effort characteri-
2ed by slight resonance or sound-
ing of throat cords when they
slightly touch one another.
ईदृा effort made for the production of
sound; cf. अापद्यते श्वासतां नादतां वा .
वक्त्रीहृयां उभयं वान्तरोभो ， ईह्यायाम् चेष्टायाम
R.Pr.XIII.1. ____
उ .
उ (l) labial vowel standing for the
longऊ and protracted ऊ3 inPanini's
grammar unless the consonant त् is
afixed to it, उत् standing for the
short उ only: (2) Wikarana affix उ
of the 8th conjugation ( तनादिगण )
and the roots धिन्व् and कृण्व्;cf.P.III.
1.79-80; (3) substitute (उ) for the
vowel अ of क्,e.g. कुरुतः, कृर्वन्ति before
weak Sarvadhatuka affixes, cfP,VI

70
उक्
उग्रभूत
4.110: (4) krt. affix उ added to
bases ending in सन् and the roots
आईट्, भिक्षु, विद्, इष् as also to bases
ending in क्यच् in the Vedic Litera-
ture,e.g. चिक्रीषुः भिक्षु:, बिन्दुः,इच्:,सुम्नयु;
cf. P. III. 2.168-170; (5) Undi
affix उ ( उणु ) e.g, कारुः, वायु:, साधु:,
etc.: cf. Unadi I.1; (6) mute vowel
उ added to the first letters of a
class of consonants in Phini's
grammar to show the whole class
of the five letters; e.g. कु, बु, द्ध, तु, पु
which stand for the Guttural, the
palatal the lingual, the dental and
the labial classes respectively: cf.
also ष्टुना ष्टुः P.VIII.4.41(7) उ added
to न showing the consonant न् as
nasalized n: cf, नुः V.Pr. III.133.
उक्र short term (प्रत्याहृार) for the vowels
उ, ऋ and ल: e.g. उगिदचां सर्वनामस्थानेs
धातोः P.VII.1.80, also श्र्युकः किति P
VII.2.1 ], इसुसुक्तान्तान् क्तः P.VII.3,
: 51.
उक (1) the krt. affix उकञ् applied to
the roots लब्, पत्, पद् and others,e.g.
लाषुक्र:, कामुकः etc. with udatta accent
on the first syllable: cf,P.III.2.154;
(2) tad.affix उक ( उफञ् ) added to
the word क्रर्मन् e.g. कार्मुकं धनुः: cf.
KaS, on P.W.I.108.
उकञ् the same as उक्र. See उक.
उक्त prescribed, taught, lit, said (al-
ready). उक्तं वा is a familiar expres-
sion in the Mahabhasya and the
Varttikas referring usually to
something already expressed.Some-
times this expression in the Ma-
habhasya, referring to something
which is not already expressed,
but which could be found sub-
sequently expressed, leads to thc
conclusion that the Mahabhव्र-
Syakara had something like a
*Laghubhasya before him at the
time of teaching the Mahabhsya.
See Kielhorn's Katyayana and ]
Patanjali, also Mahabhasya D.E.
S.Ed. Vol. VII, pages 7I, 72.
उक्तषुस्क a word with its meaning (in
the neuter gender) unchanged
when used in the masculinegender;
generally an adjectival word; cf,
Candra Vyak. I.4.30.
उक्ताथे a word or expression whose
sense has been already expressed.
The expression उक्तार्थानामप्रयेोगः is
frequently used in the Maha-
bhsya and the Varttikas and cited
as a Paribhasa or a salutary con-
ventional maxim against repetition
of words in the Paribhasapathas
of Vyadi (Par. 51), Candragomin
(Par 28) and Katantra (Par. 46)
and Kilapa (Par. 46) grammars.
उक्ताप्रयोगा see उक्तार्थे.
उाक्तपद्, उक्तिपदानि a short anonymous
treatise on case-relations, com-
pounds etc. written mostly in
Gujarati.
उक्तिरत्नाकर a short grammar work,
written by साधुसुन्दर, explaining
declension, cases and their mean-
ings, compounds, etc. and giving
a list of Prikrta words with their
Sanskrit equivalents.
उक्थादि a class of words headed by
the wordउक्थ to which the taddhita
affix इक (ठक् ) is applied in the
sense of one who studies and
understands'; cf. उक्थमधीते वेद वा
औक्थिकः, similarly लौक्रायतेक: Kas. on
P. IV. 2.60.
उख्य a writer on Vedic phonetics
and euphony guoted in the Tait-
tiriya Pratisakhya; cf. उख्यस्य सपूर्वे:
Tai. Pr. VIII. 22.
उ'ागत् characterized by the mute
indicatory letter उ, ऋ or ल; see उक्.
or उग्राचार्य writer of a gloss on
the Nirukta, called Niruktabhsya'

उङ्क
believed to have lived in the 18th
century A. D; wriier also of a
rammatical work Sisyahitvrtti or
isyahitnyasa, which was sent to
kshmir and made popular with
a large sum of money spent upon
it, by his pupil Ananadpla.
उङ्क a technical term for उपधा, the
penultimate letter in the Jai-
nendra Vyakarana; cf. इदुदुडः Jain.
V. 4.28.
उच्च the higher tone also called उदात्त
or acute: cf. नीचमुल्चात् R. T. 55,
also एत स्वराः प्रकम्पन्ते यत्रोच्चस्वरितेदयाः
R. Pr. III. 19; cf. also the terms
उच्चति R. T. 61, एकेच्च R. T. 62,
अाद्युच्च, अन्तेाच्वक. etc.
SN
उचैः उच्च or acute: see उच्च above;
cf. उच्चैस्तरां वा वषट्कारः P. 1.2.35.
उचरित pronounced or uttered the
phrase उच्चरितप्रध्वंसिन: is used in
connection with the mute indica-
tory letters termed इत् in Panini's
grammar, as these letters are not
actually found in use in the lan-
guage and aretherefore supposed to
vanish immediately after their pur-
pose has been served. The phrase
*उच्चरितप्रध्वंसिनीSनुबन्धा: * has been
given as a Paribha by Vyadi
(Pari.11), in the Candra Vyka-
rana ( Par. 14), in the Katantra
Vyakarana (Pari.54) and also in }
the Kalapa Vyakarana ( Par.
7i). Patafijali has used the ex-
pression उच्चरितप्रध्वंसिनः in connec-
tion with ordinary letters of a
word, which have existence for a
moment and which also vanish
immediately after they have been
uttered; cf. उच्चरितप्रध्वंसिनः खल्वपि वर्णा:
...न बणे वर्णस्य सहृाय: M. Bh. on I.4.
109.
उच्चरितप्रध्वंसिन् vanishing immediate-
ly after utterance. See उच्चरित.
71
उचारण pronunciation,
उञ्ज
enunciation
(in the Sstra). The phrase उच्चारण-
सामथ्र्यात् is often found used in
the Mahbhasya and else-
where in connection with the
words ofPanini, everyone of which
is believed to , have a purpose
or use in the Sastra, which pur-
pose, if not clearly manifest, is
assigned to it on the strength (सामथ्र्य)
of its utterance; cf. उच्चारणसामथ्र्यादत्र
( हिंन्येा: ) उत्वं न भविष्यति M.Bh. on
III.4.89 V. 2: cf also M.Bh. on
IV.4.59, VI.4, 163, VII.1.12, 50,
VII.2.84, In a few cases, a letter
is found used by Panini which
cannot be assigned any purpose but
which has been put there for faci-
lity of the use of other letters.
Such letters are said to be उच्चारणार्थे:
cf. जग्धि: ' इकार उच्चारणार्थ: नानुबन्धः
KS. on II 4.36.च्लि लुडि. इकार उच्चार-
णार्थ:; चकारः स्वरार्थः | Ks, on III.1.
43. The expressions मुखसुखार्थः and
श्रवणार्थ: in the Mahabhasya mean
the same as उचारणार्थः.
उच्चावच diverse: cf. उच्चावचेष्वर्थेषु भवन्ति
निपाता: Nir. I.3.4.
उचेस्तरां specially accented; उदात्ततर:
cf. उच्चैस्तरां वा वषट्कार P. I.2.35.
उज्ज्वलदत्तं the famous commentator
onthe Upadi sutras. His work .is
called Upadistravrtti, which 's
a scholarly commentory on the
Updistrapatha, consisting of five
Padas. Uijvaldatta is belived to
hawe liyed in the l5th century
AD. fe quotes Vrttinyasa, Anu-
hysa, Bhagavrttf etc. He is also
known by the name.jajali.
उग्LC l ) short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for
vowels excepting अ and इ, semi-
vowels, nasal consonants and the
gansonants , इ and भ्.; cf मय उर्जा
बी व P. VIII.3.33; (2) the par-

उञ्छादि 72
ticle उ: cf. उाज्ञ च पद P. VIII. 3.2ds
also उञ्ज: P. 1. I.17.
उञ्छदि a class of words headed by
the word उञ्छ which have their
final vowel accented acute (उद[त) ;
cf. उञ्छः म्लेच्छा, जल्पः | एत घञ्जन्ता इति
अत्रुवर: प्रात: | Kas. on P. VI. ] . 169.
उट् augment उ affixed to the roots दृ
andतृ before the krt affix वृ: cf
तृरुतृतरूतृवरुतृ वरूतृवरूत्रीरिति तर्तेड्नश्च
तृाव उट् ऊट् इत्येतावाग निपात्यत Ks. om
P. VID.2.34.
उण् the affix उण्, causing वृद्धि on ac-
count of the mute letter ण , pre-
scribed after the roots क्, वा, पा, जि,
मि, स्वद्, साध् and अदू by the rule
कृवापाजिमिस्बदिसाध्येभ्य उण् which is the
first rule (or Sttra) of a series of
rules presbribing various affixes
which are called unadi afixces,
' the affix उणु heing the first of them.
. e.g. कारुः, वायु , स्वादु, साधु etc.; cf
Undi I, 1. _
उणादि affixes headed by the affix उण्,
which are similar to krt affixes of
Panini, giving derivation mostly of
such words as are not derived by
rules of Panini. No particular
. sense such as agent, object etc. is
mentioned in connection with
these affixes, but, as Panini has
stated in **ताभ्यामन्यत्रेाणादय: '' P. III.
4.75, the various Unadi affixes are
applied to the various roots as
prescribed in any Karaka sense,
except the सेस्रदान and the अपादानः
in other words, any one of the
senses, agent, object, instrument
and abode, is assigned to the
Undi affix as suits the meaning
of the word. Although some
scholars believe that the Unidi
affixes are given by a grammarian
later than Panini as there are
words like ताम्बुल, दीनार and others
included in the list of Unadi
उणादि
words and that there are many
interpolated Stºtras, still the Ujad
collection must be looked upon
as an old one which is definitely
mentioned by Panini in two
different rules; cf. Panini उणादयेो
वहुलम् P. IIf. 3.1 and ताभ्यामन्यत्री-
णदय: III. 4. 76. Patafijali has
given a very interesting discus-
sion about these Unadi affixes
and stated on the strength of the
Varttika, तत्रणादिप्रतिषेधः, that these
affixes and the words given in
the Unadi collection should not
be considered as genuitely de-
rived.The derivation is not a very
systematic and logically correct one
and therefore for practical pur-
poses, the words derivcd by the
application of the affixes उणु and
others should be looked . upon
as underived: cf. उणादयेाSव्युत्पन्नानि
प्रातिपदिकानि. M. Bh. on. P. I. 1.16,
III. 4. 77, IV. 1. 1, VI. 1. 62,
VIl. 1. 2, WII. 2. 8 etc. There is
a counterstatement also seen in
the Mahabhasya उणादयो ब्युत्पन्नानि,
representing the other view pre-
vailing at the time: cf. M. Bh.
on III. I. 133; but not much
importancc seems to be attached
to it. The different systcms of
grammar havc different collect-
ions of such words which are also
known by the term Unidi.Out of
the collections belonging to Pani-
ni's system, three collections arc
available at present, the collection
into fire pdas given in the prin-
ted edition of the Siddhanta
Kaumudi, the collection into tem
Padas given in the printed edi-
tion of the Prakriya-Kaumudi and
the collection in the Sarasvati-
kanthibharana of Bhoja forming
Padas 4, 2 and 3 of the second
Adhyaya of the work.

उणाद्वकज्ञा
73
उ-ं
उणादेिकीरा a metrical work explain-
ing the उणाद words referfed to
above with meanings assigned
to them. There are two such
compositions one by Ramatar-
kaviga or Ramasarma and the
other by Ramacandra Dikita.
उणादिप्रतिपद्भिक्: word form or crude
base, ending with an affix of
the un class, which is looked
upon as practically underived,
the affixes u and others not be-
ing looked upon as standard
afixes applied with regular mean-
ings attached to them and
caPable of causing operations to
the preceding base as prescribed
by rules of grammar: cf. उणद्येS
ब्युत्पन्नानि प्रातिपदिकानि | व्युत्पन्नानीति इाक्र-
इय्न्रीत्या पाणिनस्त्वब्युत्पत्तिपक्ष एवेति इदन्दु-
रेखरे निरूपितम्. Pari. Sek. on Pari-
bhs 22.
' उणादिस्त्र, उणादिसूत्रपाठ the text of
the Sutras which begins with
the Sitra prescribing the affix
उण् after the roots क्, वा, पा, जि, स्वद्,
सइ and अद्: cf Undi Stºtra 1. [.
for the different versions of the
text See उणादि. Similar Sitras in
Katantra, Apisali, Sakayana and
other systems of grammar are also
called Unadi Sutras.
उणाद्विसूत्रद्इापादी the text of the
Unadi Stºtras divided into ten
chapters believed to have been
written by ज्ञाकटायन. It is printed
at the end of the Prakriya Kau-
mud and separately also, and is
also available in manuscripts
with a few differences. Pataत्jali
in his Bhasya on P.III.3.1, seems to
have mentioned Sakatyaha as the
author of the Unadi Stras al-
though it cannot be stated defi-
nitely whether there was
at that time, a version of
10
the sitras in five chapters
or in ten chapters or one, com-
pletely different from these, as
scholars believe that there are
many interpolations and changes
in the versions of Unadi stºtras
available at present. A critical
study of the various versions is
extremely desirable.
उणाद्विस्त्रपञ्चपार्दी the text ofthe Undi
Stºtras divided into five chapters
which is possessed of a scholarly
commentary written by Ujjwala-
datta. There is a commentary on
it by Bhat:oj Diksita also.
उणादिसूत्रवृत्ति a gloss on the Undi
Sपेtras in the different versions.
Out of the several glosses on the
Unadi Stitras, the important ones
are those written by Ujjvaladatta,
Govardhana, Purusottamadeva,
Ramacandra Diksita and Hari-
datta. There is also a gloss called
Undistrodghtana by MiSra.
There is a gloss by Durgasirhha
on the Kºtantra version of the
Undi Sitras.
उत् (1) Short vowel उ in Paninis
terminology cf, P.I.1.70, I,2.21.
IV.1.44, V.1.111 ; (2) tad-affix उत्
applied to पूर्वे and पूवैतर for which
पर् is substituted: e. g. परुत्. See P.
V. 3.22 Vart.
उत्करादि a class of words headed by
the word उत्कर, to which the tad-
dhita affix छ is added in the four
senses, the affix being popularly
known as चातुरर्थिकः cf. उत्करीयम्,
शफरीयम् etc.: Kas. on P. V. 2.90.
उत्क्रम a variety of the Krama des-
cribed in the Pratisakhya works.
उत्तम (1) the best,the highest,the last:
(2) the last letter of the consonant-
classes, the nasal; cf, A.Pr.II.4.14;
R.Pr. IV.3; cf. also अनुत्तम meaning
non-nasal; (3) the उत्तमपुरुष or the

उद्य
उस्तर 74
premier or the first person भढ or भट्टोत्पल, the famous astrologer
onstituting the affixes मि, वस् | of the tenth century-
and मम् and their substitutes cf.
P.I.4.107.
उत्तर (1) following, subsequent, e. g.
उत्तरपद, the latter part of a com-
pound word; (2) end of a word,
पेदान्त: cf. उत्तर पदसिन्त वर्तमान: Com. on
T. Pr. III. ].
उत्तरकालम् subsequently, then, after-
wards: cf. तत् उत्तरकालामदं दृष्टम् M.Bh.
on I.1.1.
उत्तरत्र in subsequent rules; cf. उत्तर-
त्रानुवर्तिष्यत M. Bh. on I.1.23.
उच्तरपद् the latter member or portion
of a compound word as contrast-
ed with पूर्वपद: cf. पतिरुतरपदमाद्युदात्तम्
A. Pr. II. 3. 11; cf also अलुगुत्तरपदे
P. VI. 3.1.
उचतररूप ulterior form.
उत्तरार्थ serving a purpose in subse-
guent rules; of use in a subse-
guent rule; cf. योगविभाग उत्तरार्थ:,
क्त्वाग्रहणमुत्तरार्थम् M. Bh. on I.2.22.
उत्थान elevation Of tone.
उत्पत्ति (I) production: cf. वर्णात्पात:
production of a phonetic element
T. Pr. 23.1 ; (2) production of
a grammatical element such as
the application of an affix or
addition of an augment or sub-
stitution of a letter or letters
during the process of word-for-
mation: cf. गतिकारकोपपदानां कृद्भिः सहृ
समासवचनं प्राक् सुबुत्पत्त: Pari. Sek. Par.
75; M. Bh. II. 2.19. Vद्वrt, 4.
उत्पद् to be produced, to be placed
after to be annexed: (caus.) to
produce, to get annexed, to add;
cf धेनुरन्न क्रमुत्पादयति Apisalis Vart.
guoted in M: Bh. on P.IV.2.45.
उत्पल , author of a commentary on
Paninis Lifganusasana. It is doubt-
ful whetherhe was the same asउत्पठ-
उत्वन् possessed of short उ: cf. नीत्वद्वर्ध-
विब्बात् P.IV.3.15I .
उत्सर्ग a general rule as contrasted
with a special rule which is called
अपवाद or exception; cf. उत्सर्गापवादयो-
रपवादे बलीयान् Hema. Pari.56: प्रकल्प्य
वापवादविषयं तत उत्सर्गोभिनिविशते Par.Sek.
Pari.63, Sira. Pari.97: cf. also उत्सर्ग-
समानदेर्श्ाां अपवादाः. For the बाध्यबाधकभाव
relation between उत्सर्ग and अपवाद
and its details see NageSa's Pari-
bhasendusekhara on Paribhiss 57
to 65: cf also न्यायैर्मिश्रान् अपवादान्प्रतीयात्
explained by the commentator as
न्याया उत्सगर्वा मह्याद्विषया धिधय: अपवादा अढप-
विषया विधयः | तान् उत्सर्गेण भिश्रानक्रीकृतान्
जानीयात् ' अपवादविषयं मुक्त्वा उत्सर्गः
प्रवर्तन्ते इत्यर्थ: R. Pr. I.23.
उत्स्त्र not consistent with what is
taught in rules of a Sistra: cf.
अनुत्सूत्रपदन्यासा सद्वृत्तिः सन्निबन्धना | इाऋद-
विटेव ने भाति राजनीतिरपस्पदा SSupla-
vadha II.
उत्सङ्गाद a class of words headed by
the word उल्सडग, to which the tadd-
hita affix इक् ( ठ ) is added in the
sense of तने हृरति (takes away by
means of): cf. हृरतिर्द्रान्तरप्रापण वर्तते |
उत्सङ्गन हृरति औत्साङ्गकः | अौडुपिकः : Kis.
' on P IV.4.15. '
उत्सादि a class of words headed by
the word उत्स to which the tadd-
hita affix अञ्ज, instead of the usual
affixes अण् and others, is added in
the sense of an offspring: cf. औत्स:,
औदपानः etc. Ks, onP.IV.1.86.
उद्य that which follows; a term fre-
quently used in the Prtisºkhya
works in the sense of *following or
पर: cf. उदयस्वराादसस्थानी हृकार एकेषाम्
explained by the commentator as
आत्मन उपारस्चराादसस्थानः T.Pr.II.47: cf.
also ऋकार उदये कण्ठो explained by
the commentator as ऋकारे उदये परभूत

उद्र्यकर . 75
सति R.Pr.II.11:cf. also नेादात्तस्वरितेादयं
P.WIII.4.67.
उदयैकर surnamed Paghaka who wrote
a commentary on the Laghusab-
dendusekhara named Jyotsn and
a very critical work on Paribhass
similar to Siradevas ParibhiSvrtti;
the work is incomplete.
उद्यकीर्ति author of a treatise giving
rules for the determination of the
pada or padas of roots; the trea-
tise is named पदब्यवस्थास्त्रकारिकाटीका
He was a.Jain grammarian, and
one ofthe pupils ofSadhusundara.
उद्चत the acute accent defined by
Panini in the words उचैरुदात्त: P.I.2.
29. The word उचै: is explained by
Patanjali in the words * आयामेो दारुण्यं
अणुता खस्य इति उचै:क्ररााण द्राव्दस्य' where
आयाम ( गात्रनिग्रहृ restriction of the
organs), दारुण्य (रूक्षता rudeness ) and
खस्य अणुता ( कण्ठस्य संवृतता closure of
the glottis) are given as specific
characteristics of the acute accent.
The acute is the prominent accent
in a word-a simple word as also a
compound word-and when a vowel
in a word is possessed of the acute ;
accent, the remaining vowels have
the अनुदात्त or the grave accent.
Accent is a property of vowels
and consonants do not possess any
independent accent. They possess
the accent of the adjoining vowel
connected with it. The acute
accert corresponds to what is
termed *accent in English and
other languages.
उदात्ततर raised acute, a tone slightly
higher than the acute tone which
is mentioned in connection with the
first half of a circumflex vowel; cf.
तस्योदात्ततरादान्तादर्धमात्रार्धमेव वाR.P.III.2.
उदक्तनिंदेश्ा conventional understand-
ing about a particular vowel in
the wording of a stra being
marked acute or udatta, when
ordinarily it should not have
been so, to imply that a Pari-
bhasa is to be applied for the
interpretation of that Sutra: cf
उदात्तनिर्दइात्सिद्धम् P.VI.1.13 Vart.14,
also Sira. Pari. 112.
उदात्तमय an accent made up of
Udatta, i. e. an accent which is a
reduced udatta.It is called also
प्रचय. It is mentioned in connection
with an acute vowel following इति
in the Padapatha, according to
Kanvas view:cf. उदात्तमयेन्यत्र नीच एव
अन्तेादान्तमध्येोदात्तयेो: पर्वणेोरंन्यत्र इति कार-
णात् परो नीच उदात्तमय एव भवति प्राचत एव
भवतीत्यर्थ: com. on V. Pr, I.150
- उदात्तश्रुति the same as एकश्रुति, accent-
lessone, mentiont d in connection
with the latter half of a circumflex
vowel as also with a grave vowel or
vowels, if not followed by apother
acute or circumflex vowel; cf
नदतस्वरितोदयंo P.VIII.4.67.
उदात्तस्सम similar to udatta although
not exactly acute, which character-
2es the latter half of the circum-
Hex vowel: cf. उदात्तसम|्ष:T.Pr.I.42.
उदाहृरण a grammatical example in
explanation of.an interpretation
cf.'नेकमुदाहृरणमसवर्णग्रहणं प्रयेोजयति PVI .
1.11.
उदित् characterized by short उ.as a
inute indicatory vowel, by virtue
of which the word कु, for instance
signifies along with क् its cognate
consonants बु, ग्, ， and ， also
cf. अणुदित्सवणस्यै चांप्रत्यये: P. I. I. 69.
Roots marked with उ as mute get
the augment इ optionally added
before the krt affix त्वा: e g-
इाभित्वा and इान्त्बा from the root
इम् ( इमु ) by virtue of the rule
उदितो वा P.VII.2.56,
उदुपधत्व possession of short उ as the
pemultimate letter, e. g. इदुद्धृत्य
चाप्रत्यय्स्य P,WII.3.41.

उद्वत्रादि
76 उद्द्योतनप्रभा
उद्वत्रादि a class of words headed by
the word उद्वातृ to which the tadd-
hita affix अञ्ज is added in the sense
of *nature ， or *profession*, cf.
उद्वातुभ्र्माव: कर्म बा औद्वात्रम् ( Similarly
अत्रेम् Kas. on P. V. 1.129.
उद्ग्राह्य alleviation, ease, relief name
given to a Sarhdhi in the PrtiSa-
khya works when a visarga and a
short vowel अ preceding it are
changed into short अ, (e. g. यः +
इन्द्र: = य इन्द्र:), as also when the
vowel ए or ओ is changed into अ
being followed by a dissimilar
vowel : e. g. अत्रे + इन्द्रः = अह्म इन्द्र:;
cf. R.Pr.II.]0.
उद्ग्राह्यपदवृति name given in the Rk.
Pratisakhya to the Udgrahasarhdhi
where the vowel अ is follow-
ed by a long vowel: e.g, कः ईषते =क्र
. ईषत R.Pr.II.10.
name given to a sarhdhi
in the Rk. Prtईkhya when the
vowel ओ or अा is changed into अ
e. g. प्र ऋभुभ्य:=श्रऋभुभ्य: also मधुना +
ऋतस्य=मधुन ऋतस्य cf. R. Pr. II. 11.
उद्धात elevation: named also उञ्जीभाव.
उद्धार (1) elision, a term used in the
sense of * lopa ? in the ancient gra-
mmar works; (2) name of a com-
mentary on the Haima-linga-
nUSaSana..
उद्दा description mention of quali-
ties: cf. गुणैः प्रापणम् M. Bh.on I.
3.2: the word is used in contrast
with उपदेश or direct mention: ef. क्रः
पुनुरुद्रोपदेक्ष्येर्विशेषः | प्रत्यक्षमाख्यानमुपदेर्शी
गुणैः प्रापणमुदृढाः | प्रत्यक्षे तावदाख्यानमुपदेई:
तद्यथा ， अगोज्ञाय कश्चिद्भां सक्थनि कर्णे वा
य्हुत्वेर्ष्योपाददाति ' अयं गौरिति , स प्रत्यक्षमा-
ख्यातम्ह ， उपादधे मे गौरिति | गुणे:
श्रापणमुदैः | तद्यथा [ कश्चित्केचिदाहु !
मे भवानुदिंदातु इति | स इहस्थ:
पूडपुत्रर्थं दृढदत्तमुद्भिद्यते | अङ्गदी कुटेछ
किरीटीं...ईदृशेद्वृद्त इति । सं गुणैःप्राच्य-
माणमाहु , उद्दिष्टो म दवदत्त इति | M. Bh.
on I. 3.2; (2) spot, place, passage
of occurrence: उदृढ उपद्दह्वा: : cf.
यथेदृशं संज्ञापरिभाषम् Pari.Sek. Pari. 2.
उईष्र्ट्रय neferred to; pointed out, sub-
ject, as contrasted with the pre-
dicate मानान्तरप्राप्तमुद्यम् ; cf. उद्दयप्र-
तिनिर्दिद्यमानयोरैक्यमापद्यत् सर्वनाम पर्यायेण
तत्ताछङ्गभाक् | तद्यथा | शैत्यं हि यत्सा प्रकृति-
र्जलस्य, शैत्यं हृि य यत्तत्प्रकृतिर्जलस्य वा | उदेश्य
in grammar refers to the subject-
part of a sentence as opposed to
the predicate-part. In the sen-
tence वृद्धिरादैच् the case is strikingly
an opposite one and the cxplana-
tion given by Patafjali is very
interesting:cl.तदतदे मङ्गलार्थं आचार्यस्य
मृष्यताम् | मङ्कगाळक्र अाचार्यः महृतः इस्रौघस्य
मङ्गलार्थं वृद्धिर्द्दमादितः प्रयुङ्कते, M, Bh.
on I. 1.1.
उई|्यविधेयभाव relationship between
the subject and the predicate
where generally thc subject is
placed first in a sentence, cf.
उद्यवचनं पूर्वं धिंधयत्वं ततः परम् [ cf. also
तादात्म्यसंसर्गकेस्थळ धिइयत्वमब उट्ये धि्ा-
षणत्वमेव विधेयम् Padavikyaratnakara.
उद्द्योत the word always rcfers
in grammar to the famous com-
mentary by Nagcsabhatta written
in the first decade of the 18th
century A. D. om the Mahbh-
syapradipa of Kaiyaga. The
Uddyota appears to be one of the
earlier works of Nigesa. It is
also called Vivarana. The com-
mentary is a scholarly one and is
looked upon as a final word re :
the exposition of the Mahabhigya.
It is believed that Nigesa wrote
12 Uddyotas and 12 Sekharas
which form some authoritative
commentaries on prominent works
in the different Sastras.
_K
name of a commentary
on the Tantrapradipa of Mai-
treya Raksita,which latterisa com-

7
उप्
7
उपज्ञन
mentary on Jinendrabuddhis
Nyāsa which itself is a commen-
tary on Jayaditya's Kasika.
उप a technical term in the.jainendra
Grammar for the terms लुय् and ढक्:
cf. अन्तरङ्गानपि विधीन् बहिरङ्ग उप् बाधते.
Jain. Pari.85, प्रकृतिग्रहणे यहुबन्तस्यापि
ग्रहृणम्Jain Pari. 20.
उपकादिं a class of words headed by
the word उपक्र after which the
taddhita affix, added in the sense
of गेत्र ( grand-children etc. ) is
optionally elided, provided the
word is to be used in the plural
number; cf. उपकलमकाः भ्रष्टक्रक्रपिष्ठला::
, also उपकाः, औपकायनाः; लमका:, लाम-
कयना ; भ्रष्टका: भ्राट्क्रयः 1 Kas. on P.
II. 4. 69.
उपगीत a fault in the pronunciation
of letters, noticed sometimes in
the utterance of a letter adjoin-
ing such a letter as is coloured
with a musical tone on account
of the proximity of the adjacent
letter which is uttered in a musical
note and which therefore is called
* प्रगीत ' ; cf.. प्रगीतः सामवदुश्चारितः ;
उपगीत:समीपवर्णान्तरगत्यानुरक्तःKaiyatas
Pradipa on M.>Bh. I. Ahnika 1.
उपग्रदृ a term used by the ancient
grammarians in the sense of the
Parasmaipada and the Atmame-
pada affixes. The word is not
found in Painis Asgadhyay.
The Warttikakara has used the
word in his Warttika उपग्रहृप्रतिषेधश्च
on P. III. 2.127 evidently in the
sense of Pada affixes referring to
the Atmanepada as explained by
Kaiyata in the wordsउपग्रह्यस्य आत्मन-
पदसंज्ञाया इत्यर्थ: | The word occurs
in theSlokavarttika सुभिडुपग्रहृलङ्गनराणां
' quoted by Pataणेjali in his Maha-
bhasya on व्यत्ययो बहुलम् P. III.
1.85, where Nagesa writes लादेइ-
ब्यङ्गथं स्वार्थत्वादि | इहं तत्प्रतीतिनिमित्ते परस्मै-
पदात्मनेपदं उपग्रहृदाव्देन लक्षणयेच्येते | The
word is found in the sense of
Pada in the Mahabhagya on P.
III. 1.40. The commentator on
Puspastra explains the word as
उपगृह्यते समीपे पछते इति उपग्रहृ:. The
author of the Kasik on P. WI.
2.134 has cited the reading
चूर्णादीन्यप्रायुपग्रह्यात् instead of चूर्णादी-
न्यप्राणिषष्ठया: and made the remark
तत्रेापग्रह्य इति षष्ठयन्तमेव पूर्वाचार्योपचारेण गृह्यते.
This remark shows that in an-
cient times उपग्रहृ meant षष्ठयन्त i. e.
a word in the genitive case. This
sense gave rise to, or was based
upon, an allied serse, wiz. the
meaning of *षष्ठी' i. e. possession.
Possibly the sense * possession '
further developed into the further
sense *possession of the fruit or
result for self or others referring
to the तिङ्क affixes which possessed
that sense. The old sense *षष्ठ्यन्त'
of the word *उपग्रहृ' having gone
out of use, and the sense 'पद'
having come in vogue, the word
*षष्ठ' must have been substituted
for the word *उपप्रहृ' by some
grammarians before the time of
the Kasikakaras. As Patanjali
has dropped the Sutra (VI. 2.134),
it cannot be said definitely
whether the change of reading
took place before Patafijali or
after him.
उपचार (l) taking a secondary sense;
implication; lit. moving for a sense
which is near about; the same as
लक्षणा. The word आचार is explained
as उपचार, employment or current
usage, by Patafijali; cf. आचारात् |
पचारात् | M. Bh. I. 1. 1.
Wart. 4; ( 2 ) substitution of the
letter सं for विसर्ग : cf. प्रत्ययग्रहृणेIपचरषु
च, P.IV.1.1 Vart, 7.
उपजन lit.origin; one that originates,
augment, उपजायते असौ उपजन: i Th6

उपजीव्य
78
उपन्यास
word is used in the sense of addi-
tional phonetic element * :, cf
उपजन अगम: M. Bh. on Siva-
stra 5: cf. also वर्णव्यत्ययापायेोपजनविका-
रष्वर्थदर्शनात् | Siva Sutra 5 Vart. 15.
The Rk Pratisakhya gives म् in
पुरुश्चन्द्र as an instance of. उपजन cf.
R. Pr. IV. 37. In the Nirukta
उ-ंजन is given as the sense of the
prefix 'उप' ; cfउपत्युपजनम्: The com.
on the Nirukta explains the word
उपजन as अाधिक्य.
उपजीव्य a term used by later gramm-
arians in connection with such a
rule on which another rule depends
cf. उपजीव्यादन्तरङ्गाच्व प्रधानं प्रबलम् Pari.
Sekh. on Pari. 97, as also M. Bh.
on तुमति च P. III. 1.26. The
relationship known as उपजीव्येीपजी-
वक्रभाव occurs several times in gra-
mmar which states the inferiority
of the dependent as noticed in
the world.
उपदंशा instruction; original enuncia-
tion; first or original precepts or
teaching: cf. उपेद् आद्योच्चारणम् S.
K. on T the rule उपदेशेजनुनासिक इत्
P. I. 3.2. cf. वर्णानमुपदेशः कर्तव्यः; M.
Bh. on Ahn. I. Virt. 15. For diff-
erence between उपदे， and उदूढा see
उदूढा: cf. also उपदिद्यतननत्युपदा: | ¶ाख्त्र-
वाक्यानि, सूत्रपाठ: fखलपाठश्च Kasik on P.
I. 3.2; cf also Vyadi. Pari. 5; (2)
ermployment (of a word) for others
cf. उपेदशा: परार्थः प्रयोगः | स्वयमेव तु बुद्धया
यदा प्ररमृदाति तदा नास्त्युपदेक्ष्: Kas. on
अदेनुपर्दा P. I. 4. 70.
उपदेशिन् such a word as is found in
the original instruction.
उपदेशोवङ्कव occurrence in the origi-
nal statement before the applica-
tion of any affixes etc., cf. एवमप्युप-
दढिावद्भावे वक्तव्य:, M. Bh. on P..
1.56, Vart. 23.
उपदेशिवद्वचन statement to the effect
that a word should be looked
upon as occurring in the original
instruction although it is not
there. See उपदेदा.cf. नुम्विधाइपंदश्शिवद्वचनं
प्रत्ययविध्यर्थम् P. VII. 1 58. Vart. 1.
उपदुत name of a sarhdhi which is
described as उद्ग्राहृचत् in R.Pr: e. g.
न ऋते. See उद्ग्राहृ.
उपघा penultimate letter,. as defined
in the rule अळीन्त्यात्पूर्वं उपघा P. I.
1. 65, e. g. see हृरूवेपध, दीघपघ, लधूपध,
अकारोपध etc.: lit. उपधयिते निर्धीयते सा
that which is placed near the last
letter.
उपधालोपिन् a word or a noun which
has got the penultimate letter
omitted: cf. अन उपधालेपिनेोन्यतरस्याम्
P. IV. 1. 28.
उपध्मानीय a letter or a phonetic elem-
ent substituted for a visarga foll-
owed by the first or the second
letter of the labial class. Visarga is
simply letting the breath out of
the mouth. Where the visarga is
followed by the first or the second
letter of the labial class, its pronun-
ciation is coloured by labial
utterance. This coloured utterance
cannot be made independently;
hence this utterance called * उपध्मा-
नीय ' ( similar to a sound blown
from the mouth ) is not put in, as
an independent letter, in thc वर्ण-
समाम्नाय attributed to महेश्वर. Patafij-
ali, however, has referred to such
dependent utterances by the term
अयेगवहृवर्ण. See अयेागचाई: cf. 8क्र इति
जिह्वामूलीयः | जिह्वामूलेन जन्यत्वात् ' sप इत्युप-
ध्मानीयं: | उपध्मानने जुन्यत्वात्. अयेगवाहृ is
also called अर्धविसर्ग. Seeअर्धवसर्ग.
उपन्यास proposition, statement, The
remark *विषम उपन्यास:* is of frequ-
ent occurrence in the Vyakarana
Mahabhasya in connection with
statements that are defective and
have to be refuted or corrected; cf.
M.Bh. on P.1.1.21,46,50; I.2.5 etc.

उपपद
79
उपमन्यु
उपपद lit.a word placed near; an adjo-
ining word. In Panini's grammar, |
the term उपपद is applied to such |
words as are put in the locative
case by Panini in his rules prescri-
bing krt affixes in rules from i II.
1, 90 to III. 4 end: cf. तत्रोपपदं
सप्तमीस्थम् P. III. 1. 92: e. g. कर्मणि in
कर्मण्यण् P. III. 2.1. The word is also |
used in the sense of an adjoining
word connected in sense. e. g.
ष्मद्युपपदo as also प्रहृस च मन्येोपप्दे<
P. I. 4. 105, 106: cf. also क्रियार्थायां
क्रियायामुपपदे धातोर्भविष्यति काले तुमुन्ण्वुलै
भवत: KaS. on P. III. 3.10; cf. also
इतरतरान्येोन्येापपदाच्च P.i.3.10, मिथ्येोपपदात्
कृञ्जनाभ्यास P. I. 3.71, as also उपपदमतिङ्क
P. II 2. 19; and गतिकारकोपपदात्कृत् P.
VI. 2. 139. Kaiyata on P. III. 1.
92 Vart. 2 explains the word उपपद
as उपेच्चारि or उपोच्चारितं पदं उपपदम्.
The word उपपद is found used in ]
the Pratisakhya literature where
it means a word standing near and
effecting some change: cf. च वा हृ
अहृ एव एतानि चप्रभ्ठतीनि यान्युपपदानि उक्तान
आख्यातस्य विकारणिकः Uvata on V. Pr.
WI. 23.
उपपदविधि a grammatical operation
caused by a word which is near;
cf उपपदविधौ भयाद्वयादिग्रहृणै P. I. 1. 72
Vart 9, also अतिप्रसङ्ग उपपदविधौ P. IV
1. 1. Vart. 8 where rules such as
* कर्मण्यण् ' and the following are
referred to as उपपदविधि, the words
कर्मणि, स्तम्ब, कर्ण, etc. bing called उपपद
by the rule तत्रोपपदं सप्तमीस्थम्: P. III. |
1. 92.
उपपदविभक्ति a case termination add-
ed to a word on account of the
presence of another word requir-
ing the addition;cf the well-known
Paribhs,उपपदविभक्तः कारकावभाक्तर्वली-
यसी. Par. Sek. Pari. 94; and M.Bh.
on I.4. 96 stating the possession of
greater force in the case of a kara-
kavibhakti than in the case of an
upapadavibhakti.
उपपदसमास the compound of a word,
technically termed as उपपद by
Panini according to his definition
of the word in III. 1. 92., with
another word which is a verbal
derivative; cf. कुम्भकार:, नगरकार:
Here technically the compound of
the words कुम्भ, नगर etc. which are
upapadas is formed with कार,before
a case-termination is added to the
nominal base कार; cf. गतिकारकोपपदानां
कृद्भिः सह समासवचने प्राक् सुबुत्पत्त: Par. Sek.
Pari. 75.
उपघन्घ a technical term used in the
Prtikhya works in the sense of
words which proceed from a rule
to the following rules upto a par-
ticular stated limit; cf. उपबन्धस्तु
दढाय नित्यम् T. Pr I. 59 explained
by the commentator as उपबध्यत इति
उपबन्धः | एतस्मिन्नित्यधिकरणरूप: संख्यानविषयः
प्रदशाश्च उपबन्ध उच्यते | उपबन्धे यदुक्तं
तदन्यत्र न भवतीति तुझाब्दाथे: !
उपब्द्मित् the fourth out of the seven
stages or places in the production
of articulate speech, upirhsu being
the first stage: cf. सळाब्दमुपद्विमत्
Tait. Pr. 23.9 explained by the
commentator as: सशब्दं परश्राव्यश्ाब्दसहि-
तम् यत्र प्रयुज्यमान:ाब्दः परैरक्षरव्यञ्जनाववेकवर्ज
श्रुयते तदुपद्वमत्संज्ञे भवति |
उपमन्यु (1) the famous commentator on
the grammatical verses attributed
to Nandikesvara which are known
by the name नन्दिकेश्वरकारिका and
which form a kind of a comment-
ary on the sutras of Mahesvara;
(2) a comparatively modern gra-
mmarian possibly belonging to the
nineteenth century who is also
named Upamanyu and who has
written a commentory on the fam-
ous Kasikavrtti by Jayaditya and
Vamana. Some believe that Upa-

उपमा
80
उपसंहृत
manyu was an ancient sage who
wrote a nirukta or etymological
work and whose pupil came to be
known as औपमन्यवः
उपमा a well-known term in Rhetorics
meaning the figure of speech
* simile ' or * comparison *. The
word is often found in the Nirukta
in the same sense; cf. अथात उपमाः |
*यत् अतत् तत्सदृढाम्'इति गाग्र्य: Nir III.13.
Generally an inferior thing is com-
pared to another that is superior
in quality.
उपमान standard of comparison. The
word is found in the Prinistra
उपमानानि सामान्यवचनै: P.II.I.55 where
the Kasikavrtti explains it as
उपमीयतऽनेनेत्युपमानम् |
उपमित an object which is compared.
The word is found in Paninistra
उपमितं व्याघ्रादिभिः P.II.1.56, where
the Kasik paraphrases it by the
word उपमेय and illustrates it by the
word पुरुष in पुरुषव्याघ.
" उपमेय an object which is to be com-
pared. See उपामेत.
उपलक्षण implication, indication: a
thing indicatory of another thing.
The term is very frequently found
in commentary works in connec-
tion with a word which signifies
something beyond it which is
similar to it; the indication is
generally inclusive; cf. Kasika on
भीरम्यंीहेतुभये P.I.3.68 भयग्रहृणमुपलक्षणार्थ
विस्मयोपि तत एव | as also मन्त्रग्रहणं तु च्छन्दस
उपलक्षणार्थम् Kas. on II. 4.80. The
verbalforms ofलक्षु and उपलक्ष् as also
the words लक्षयितुम्, लक्षणीय, लक्षित etc.
possess the sense of expressing
the meaning not primarily, but
secondarily by indication or
implication'.
उपलिङ्गिन् a substituted word element 3
cf. देवः इति सुखनाम	शिक्ष्यतेः वकार: नाम
कृरणः अन्तस्थान्तुरोपलिङ्गीं विभाषितगुणः |
दिावम् Nir. X. I7.
उपवर्ष an ancient grammarian and
Mimarasaka believed to have been
the brother of Warsa and the
preceptor of Panini. He is refer-
red to, many times as an ancient
writer of some Wrttigranthas.
उपश्लेष immediate contact, as for
instance, of one word with another:
: cf. 1्ाब्दस्य च शब्देन क्रान्येाभिसंबन्धो भवितु-
|ु मर्हति अन्यदत उपश्छयात्	M.Bh. on VI.
L1.72. The word उपाळट is also
Tfound in the Mahabhasya in the
Sarne context.
उपसंख्यान mention, generally of the
type of the annexation of some
words to words already givcn, or
of some limiting conditions or
additions to what has bcen already
stated. The word is oftcn found
at the end of the statements made
by the Varttikakra on thc sitras
of Panini.: cf. P.I.1.29 Vद्वrt. 1:
I.1.36 Vart. 3 etc. The words
वाच्य and वक्तव्य are also similarly
used.. The word is found similarly
used in the Mahabhiya also vcry
frequently.
उपसेग्रहृ inclusion ofsomcthing, which
is not directly mentioned: cf.
प्रसिद्ध्युपसंग्रहार्थमेतत्Ks.on P.I.3.48,also
इतिकरणं एवंविधानामेप्यन्येषामुपसंग्रहार्थम् K;.
on P. VII.4.65.
उपसंयोग् (l)union:cfनामाख्यातयोस्तु कर्मप-
संयोगधेतक्रा भवन्ति prepositions are
signs to show that such a union
with another sensc has occurred
in the casc of the noun or verb to
which they are prefixed, Nir. I.3.:
(2) addition; cf. अक्रियमाणे हि संज्ञाग्रहृणे
गरीयानुपसंयोगः कर्तव्यः स्यात् M.Bh. on P.
IW. 2 21.Wrt, 2.
उपसंदृत drawn close: cf.अा दूपसंहृततरो
T. Pr. II.14. The root उपसंहृ is
पुsed in the sense of finishing in
the Mahabhsya; cf. यनव यहे
वर्ण उचार्यते विच्छेिले वैर्ण उपसंहृत्यं तम्

उपसमस्त
81
e
उपस्था
दाय द्वितीय: प्रयुज्यत तथा तृतीयस्तथा चतुर्थः |
M.Ph. on P.I.4. 109 Vart. 6.
उपसमस्त compounded together, join-
ed together by special grammatical
connection called समास: cf. न केवळ;
पथिन्शब्दः स्त्रियां वर्तते | उपसमस्तस्तर्हि वर्तते
M. Bh. on VII. 1.1. Vart. 18.
उपसर्ग preposition, prefix. The
word उसपर्ग originally meant
only * a prefixed word ?: cf. सेपसगेषु
नामसु R. Pr. XVI. 38. "l he word
becatme technically applied by
ancient Sanskrit Gratmmarians to
the words प्र, परा, अप, सम् etc.
which are always used along
with a verb or a verbal deriva-
tive or a noun showing a verbal
activity cf. उपसर्गाः क्रियेायेग P. I.
*.59. 'hese prefixes are necessari-
iy compounded with the follow-
ing word unless the latter is a
verbal form; cf. कुगतिप्रादयः P. II.
2.18. Although they are not
compoumded with a verbal form,
these prepositions are used in
juxtaposition with it; sometimes
they are fonnd detached from the
verbal form even with the inter-
vention of one word or more.
The prefixes are instrumental in
changing the meaning of the root.
Some scholars like Skatyana
hold the view that separated from
the roots, prefixes do not cxpress
any specific sense as ordinary
words express, while scholars
like Gargya hold the view that
prefixes do express a sense e. g.
प्र means beginning or प्रारम्भ: cf.
न निर्वद्धा उपसग अर्थान्निराहुरिति इाकटायनः |
नामाख्यातयोस्तु कर्मापसंयेोगेद्योतका भवन्ति |
उच्चावचाः पदार्था भवन्तीति गार्थः | तद्य एषु
पदार्थः तं नामाख्यातयोरर्थचिक्ररणम्
Nir. I. 8. It is doubtful, however,
which view Panini himself held.
In his Atmanepada topic, he has
mentioned some specific roots
11
as possessing some specific senses
when preceded by some specific
prefixes (see P. I. 3.20, 24, 25,
40, 4l, 46, 52, 56, etc.), which
implies possibly that roots th:m-
selves possess various senses, while
prefixes are simply instrumental
in indicating or showing them.
On the other hand, in the topic
of the Karmapravacanjyas,the same
words प्र, परा etc. which, however,
are not termed Upasargas for the
time being, although they are
called Nipatas, are actually assign-
ed some specific senses by Panini.
The Varttikakara has defined
उपसर्ग as क्रयाचि्चक उपसर्गः P. I.
3.I. Vart 7, leaving it doubtfuI
whether the उपखर्ग or prefix posses-
ses an independent sense which
modifies the sense of the root,
or without possessing any inde-
pendent sense, it shows only the
modified sense of the root which
also is possessed by the root.
Bhartrhari, Kaiyata and their
followers including Ngesa have
emphatically given the view that
not only prefixes but Niptas,
whi la include प्र, परा and others
as Upasargas as well as Karma-
pravacanyas, do not denote any
sense, but they indicate it; they
are in fact द्यूतक्र and not चान्वक.
For details see Nir. I. 3, Vakya-
padya II. 190, Mahabhasya on
' i. 3.1. Vart. 7 and Pradipa and
Uddyota thereon. The Rk Pr्-
tisakhya has discussed the gues-
tion in KII. 6-9 where, as
explained by the commentator,
it is stated that prefixes express a
sense along with roots or nouns
to which they are attached. It
is not clear whether they convey
the sense by denotation or indi-
cation, the words चचक in stanza

उपसर्गद्योत्यता 82
6 and विशेषकृत् in stanza 8 being in
favour of the former and the
latter views respectively: cf उपसर्गा
विंज्ञातिरर्थवान्वक्राः संहृतंराभ्यामितरे निपाता: ;
क्रियावाचकभाख्यातमुपसगे बिशेषकृत्, सत्त्वाभि-
धायकं नाम निपातः पादपूरण: R. Pr, KII.
st. 6 and 8. For the list of upa-
sargas see R. Pr. XII. 6, T.
Pr. I. 15, V. Pr. VI.24, and S.
K. on P. I. 4.60.
उपसर्गद्योत्यता the view or doctrine
that prefixes, by themselves, do
not possess any sense, but they
indicate the sense of the verb or
noun with which they are conne-
cted, For details See Wakyapadya
II. 165-206; also vol. VII. pages
370-372 of Vyakarama Mahabha-
sya ed. by the D. E. Society,
Poona.
उपसर्गयोग connection with a prefix;
joining of the prefix. Some
scholars of grammar hold the view
that the Upasarga is prefixed to
the root and then the verbal
form is arrived at by placing the
desired terminations after the
root, while others hold the oppo-
site view: cf. पूर्वं धातुः साधनेनोपयुज्यते
पश्चादुपसगेण | अन्ये तु पूर्वं धातुरुपसर्गेण युज्यते
पश्चात्साधनेनेत्याहुः Siradevas Paribhव्र-
savrtti Pari. 131, ]32; cf also
vol. VII. Mahbhsya edited by
the D. E. Society, Poona, pages
871-372.
उपसर्गवाद् a treatise on upasargas, by
Harikrsna.
उपसर्गवेिवार a treatise on upasargas
by Gaddhara Cakravartin.
उपसर्गविवरण a short anonymous work
on the nature of upasargas or
prepositions explaining their mean-
ings with illustrations.
त a treatise on upasargas by
Bharatamalla in the Sixfeenth
Century A.D.
उपसर्जन (1)
उपा|्थत
adjective, subordinate
member which does not get the
treatment of the principal mem-
ber, e. g. गोस्त्रियेरुपसर्जनस्य P. I.2.48, '
अनुपसर्जनात् P.IV.1.14 संज्ञोपसर्जनीभूतास्तु न
सर्वादयः S. K. on P. I. 1.29, also
P.I.1.27 Vart.2;(2) a word referred
to by the word which is put in the
nominative case in rules of Panini
prescribing compounds, e. g. कष्ट
(in the compound क्रष्टश्रितः) which is
referred to by the word द्वितीया in
the rule द्वितीया श्रितातीतo P.II.1.24
which prescribes the Acc. Tat-
purusa compound. These words
are given the first place in a com-
pound; cf. प्रथमानिर्दिष्टं समास उपसर्जनम्
P.I.2.43, उपसर्जनं पूर्वम् P.II.2.30; (3) a
word which has one and the same
case when a compound in the
different cases is shown as dissolv-
ed, e. g. the word क्रोदाम्बी in the
compound निष्क्रोदाम्बि: which keeps
its ablative case when the com-
pounds निष्क्रीळाभिवम् , निष्क्रीदाम्वना,
निष्क्रौढाम्बये etc. are dissolved; cf.
एकविभक्ति चापूर्वनिपात P.I.2.44.
उपस्टष्ट attended with a prcfix, gene-
rally used in connection with
roots; e.g. कुधदुर्हीरुपसृष्टयेीः कर्म P.I.4.38
where the KSik has explaincd
the word as उपसर्गसंश्रद्ध.
उपस्कार introduction of the necessary
changes in the wording of the
base, such as elision, or addition
or substitution of a letter or letters
as caused by the addition of
suffixes.
उपस्थान occurrence: prescnce by vir-
tue of anuvrtti i. e. recurrencc or
continuation of a word in the
rules that follow: cf. शब्देन चाप्यधिकृतन
कीन्यो व्यापार: शक्येावगन्तुमन्यदती योगे येोग
उपस्थानात् M.Bh. on 1.3.1 ]. Vairt. 1.
उपस्थित a word used father techni-
cally in the sense of the word इति

उपाहत
83
उभयगाति
which is used in the Krama and
other recitals when Vedic reciters
show separately the two words
compounded together by uttering
the compound word first, then
the word इति and then the two
compound words, e.g. सुश्लोक 3 इति
सु-ठीक ' विभावसो इति विभा-वसे. The
KSiki defines the word उपस्थित as
समुदायादवच्छिद्य पदं येन स्वरूपे अवस्थाप्यते तद्
उपस्थितम् ' इतिशब्दः Kas.on VI.1.129.
The Rk-Pratisakhya explains the
word rather differently, but in the
same context.The wordafter which
इति is placed is called upasthita e.g.
the word बाहू in बाहू इति or विभावसौ
in विभावसी इति as contrasted with
स्थित i. e. the word without इति e.g.
， cr विभावसेी, as also contrasted
with स्थितेीपस्थित i.c. the whole word
विभावसे इति विभाsवसे which is also
called संहृित or मिलित: (2) occurring,
present; cf कार्यकालं संज्ञापरिभाषम् | यत्र
कार्य तत्रोपास्थतं द्रष्टव्यम्	Par.Sek. Pari.3.
उपहित (l) with, preceded by; e g.
, दीघपहिंत, हृस्वेोपाहृत, (2) sticking t6,
* connected with, *उपश्लेषित': cf.Durga
on Nir.V.12;(3) coming to be'plac-
ed near or injuxtaposition with the
preceding word: cf. आवेोन्तोपाहृतात् सत:
R. Pr. II.15.
उपांछ lit inaudible. The word is
explained in the technical sense
as the first place or stage in the
utterance of speech where it is
perfectly inaudible although pro-
' duced; cf. उपांशु इति प्रथमं बाच्व: स्थानम्
Com. on T. Pr. XXIII, 5.
उपाचरित (l) sibilation substitution
ofa sibilant letter for a visarga:
cf. प्डतोपाचरिते च R. Pr. XI.19; (2)
name of the sarhdhi in which a
visarga is changed into a sibilant
letter; cf. सर्वत्रैवोपाचरितः स सेाध: R.
Pr. IV-14 which corresponds to
Panini WIII. 3.18 and 19.
| उपाचार change of Visarga into s (स्):
sibilation of Visarga, e. g. ब्रह्मण:
प्रतिः = ब्रह्मणस्पति:. The words उuन्चार
and उपाचरित are found used in the
same sense by ancient Grammari-
ans. See उपन्चार; cf. समापाद्य नाम वदन्ति
प्रत्वं, तथा णत्वं सामवशाांश्च सन्धीन् ...उपान्चारं
लक्षणतश्च सिद्धम् , आचार्या व्याळज्ञाकल्यगाग्र्याः
R. Pr. VIII.12.
उपादान hypothesis,
acceptance.
उपाघ lit. near the first; second.
उपाधि condition, limitation, determi-
< mant, Gualification: e.g. न हि उपाध-
रुपाधिर्भवति, विशेषणस्य वा विशेषणम् M.Bh.
on I.3.2 as also on W.1.16; cf also
इहृ ये विद्वेष उपाधिर्वेषूपादीयत द्योत्थ तरुिमसेतन
भवितव्यम् ( M.Bh. on III.1.7.
उपान्त lit. near the last: penultimate.
The word is generally found used
in the Candra Vyakarana.
उपान्त्य see उपान्त; the word is gene-
ral!y found used in the grammars
of Sakatyana and Hemacandra.
उपोत्तम lit.one near or before the last
the term is generally used in con-
nection with words having two or
more syllables, where it means
the vowel before the last (vowel);
cf. उपोत्तमं रिति P. WI.1.217 and
योपधाद्गुरूपोत्तमादुञ्ज P.V.1.132 where
the writer ofthe Kasik explains it
as त्रिप्रभृतीनामन्त्यमुत्तमं तस्य समीपमुपोत्तमम् |
giving रमणीय and वसनीय asexamples
where the long ई is upottama;_ cf.
alsoT.Pr. XI.3.andNir.I.19 where
the word refers to the third out of
the four feet of the verse.
उपेीद्वलक a supporting assertion or
statement;cf तयैवेीपेीद्वलक्रमतत् M.Bh.
on I.2.64. Vलrt. 38-39.
उभयगति both the alternatives; both
the senses; double signification;cf.
उभयगतिरिहृ भवति P.I.1.23,Vart4,Pari.
\ Sek, Par. 9 where the word ubhaya
presumption,

उभयतस्पाइाा
84
उस्त
refers to both the senses-the ordi-
nary one ( अकृत्रिम } and the techni-
cal one ( वृत्रिम)--e.g. the meanings
( i ) numeral, and ( ii ) words वहु, रण
etc. of the word संख्या.
उभयतस्पाशा presenting a difficulty in
both the ways: cf सेधा उभयतस्पाइ
रज्जुर्भवति M.Bh. on VI.1.68.
उभयतेीभाष lit. speaking or showing
both the padas or voices; possess-
ed of both the padas vi2. the
Parasmaipada and the Atmane-
pada The word is found common-
ly used in the Dhtupgha of
Pnini.
उभयत्र im both the ways lit. in both
the places: cf. उभयत्र च P. I. }. 44
Wrt. 22, The word उभयत्रविभाषा is
used in grammar referring to the
option ( विभाषा) which is प्राक्ष as also
अप्राप्त: cf.MBh.on P.1.1.26 Vart.22.
उभयथt in both the ways (in the case
of an option, of course): cf. छन्दस्यु-
भयथा P.III.4.117 where the word
ubhayath refers to both the alter-
native uses e.g. Srvadhituka and
Ardhadhituka;so also vidhilih and
Sirlih; cf. Ksik on P.III.4.117.
The term ubhayath is described
as Synonymous with *bahulam' or
*anyatarasyrh' or *v' or ekosm';
cf. बहुलमन्यतरस्यामुभयथा वा एकेषामिति M.
Bh. on P.I. 1.44: Vart. 19; cf. also
अध्यूतेभ्यः स्मरन्ति R.Pr.xV.8.
उभयदीघ a , hiatus or a stop which
occurs between two long-vowelled
syllables: the term उभयदीघ is a
conventional term in the Prti-
Skhya literature. The term उभय-
ड्रुवा is similarly used in conncction
with short vowels.
उभयनियम a restriction understood in
both the ways; cf. सिद्धं तुभयानय्मात्
उभयनिथमीयम् | प्रकृतिपरः एव प्रत्ययैः प्रयेक्तव्यः,
प्रत्ययपरैव न्व प्रकृतिरिति | M. Bh. on P.
III.1.2, Vart. 1 l: cf also M. Bh.
on WI.2.148.
उभयपद (1) double voice--the Paras-
maipada as well as the Atmane-
pada: (2) both the words or
raermbers (in a compound); cf:
उभयपदार्थप्रधाने द्वन्द्व: Ks on P.I.2.57.
उभयपदिन् a root conjugated in both
the Padas: a root to which
both, the Parasmaipada and the
Atmanepada terminations are
affixed : e.g. roots ., भी, सुट् Ctc.
उभयप्राप्तं a case or a natter in which
both the alternatives occur, as for
instance, the genitivc casc for the
subject and the object of a verbal
derivative noun (कृदेन्त); cf. उभयप्राप्तौ
कर्मणि | उभधेः: प्रक्षि: यमन् क्षुति सेयंभुभय-
प्रात: तत्र कर्मथव -ं स्थातुं न कर्तरि |
अाश्रयं गवां देह्यः अहिन ki. om P.
II. 3. 66.
उभयचर possessed of both the kinds
of propertics; cf. य इदनीमृभयान् स
तृतीयामार:यां ळभूत स्वरित इति M.Bh. on
P.[.2.8 ; cf. also उभयथा रित: V.
Pr.I. ! ] 0.
उम् the augment ， affixcd to the
last vowel of ब by P.VII.1.20;
C-8 अर्धयत् .
उरल् tad-affix उर, with uditta accent
on the last vowcl, affixcd to the
word दन्तं whcn it rcfers to protu-
berant tecth; cf t*.V.2.66; c.g.
दतुर: !
उरःप्रभृति a class of words headed by
the word उरस् to which the sama-
snta affix क्र (कप् ) is addcd, whcn
thcse words stand at the cnd of
Bahuvrihi compounds cf. व्यूढमुरोस्य
व्यूढोरस्कःsimilarly श्रिय्कः, Kas. on
1.V. I. 151.
उख्य produccd at the brcast; cf.केचि-
देतां उरस्र्यां R.!'r.i.18, explained b
the commentator as केचिदाचार्थाः ए
हृ र्बेसर्जनीयं उरःस्थाने इच्छति !
उख्तt opcning (of the hole of the
throat); the words , उरुता ख्स्य are

उरोवृहृती 85
used in the sense of *opening of
the glottis" which is described as
a characteristic condition of thc
utterance of a vowel accented
grave or अनुदात्त: cf. अायामं दारुण्यमणुत
खस्येत्युच्चैः कराणि इब्दस्य , अन्ववसर्गो मार्दव
मुरुता खस्थेति नीचैःकराणि शब्दस्य M.Bh.
on नीचैरनुदात: P. I. 2.30 cf. T. Pr.
on XXII. 9, 10.
उरोवृहुर्ती a variety of the Vedic metre
ब्रहृती in which the first pada com-
sists of twelve syllables and the
rest of eight syllables; cf. R, Pr.
XVI. 33.
उव् (उवङ्क) substitute for the vowc!
उ belonging to the Vikaraha , to
roots and to the noun भू under
certain conditions: cf अचि घातुधुवां
वेरियङ्कश्र्रौ P. VI. 4.77.
उवट also उब्बट or ऊअट a reputcd
Kaasmirian scholar and writer who
was the son of Wajrata. He wrote
many learned commentaries, some
of which are known as Bhasyas.
Some of his important works are
Rkpratisakhyabhasya, Vajasaney.
pratisakhyabhasya, Vjasaneyisa-
mhitabhasya, Vedarthadipika etc.
उष्णिह्य (उष्णिक्) name of the second of
the main 'severa Vedic metres
which are known by the name
श्रजापतिच्छन्दसू. The Usmik metre con-
sists of 28 syllables divided into
three padas of 8, 8 and 12 sylla ,
bles. It has got rmany varieties
such as पुरउष्णिहृ, ककुभ् and others;
for details see R. Pr. XVI 20-26.
उऩ् (1) substitute for इिम,ending of the
third pers.plu., in the perfect tense
and in the present tense in the
case of the roots विद् and ब्, e.g.
बिदुः and आहु: cf. P. II1. 4. 82-84 ;
(2) substitute जुस् (उट्) for ञ्जि in the
potential and the benedictive
moods, as also after the aorist
sign सु and after roots of the third
ऊत्
comjugation, roots ending in अां
and the root विदु, e. g. पचेयुः भूयासुः
अका:, अविभयुः अदुः, अधिदुः, etc.; cf.
Ka!. on III.4.108-112.
उलि Undi afix उस् applied to the
root जन् to form जनुर्: cf. जनरुासः U2.
sitra. 272.
उ
उ long vowel ऊ, उ being the short
vowel.
ऊक् augment ऊ added to the अभ्यास or
the reduplicative syllable ofthe root
पट् which is doubled before the
affix क्र which is used instead of घ
( घञ्जथे कः ): e.g. पादूपटः.
ऊक krt affix ऊक्र added to the root
जाग्र to form the word जागाख्क्र: cf.
जागुरूक: P. III.2.165.
ऊङ्ग fem. affix ऊ prescribed after
masculine nouns ending in the
vowel ऊ and denoting a human be-
ing as also after some other specific
masculine bases cf ऊडुत: P. IV.
I.66 and the following sufras. e.g.
कुरूः, पंड्यू:, श्वश्:, करमेखः, भद्रबाहुः etc.
ऊद् also उद् ईgama ऊ and उ prescrib-
ed after the rcots तृ and वृ before
the affix तृन् or तृच् e. g. तरुतारं तख्तारं
वा रथानाम्: वरुतारं वरूतारं वरूत्री:; cf. Ks.
on P. VII,2.94.
ऊट् (1) sarnprasrana vowel ऊ sub-
stituted for the व् ofवीहृ under cer-
tain conditions e.g., ऊढः, cf. बाह्य
ऊट् P. VI. 4.132; (2) substitute ऊ
for ， before certain affixes; e. g.
दूत:, दूत्वा, जूर्तिः, तूर्तिः etc. cf च्वो:
शूडनुनासेिके च P. VI.4.19, 20.
उत् (l) long vowel ऊ which cannot
be combined by rules of samdhi
with the following vowel when it
comes at the end of the forms of the
dual number e. g. साधू अत्र etc.: cf.
ईदूदेद्द्ववचनं प्रग्र्ह्यम् P. I.1.11, as ， also

ऊत्त्र 86
ऋक्तन्त्रं
ईदूतौ च सप्तम्यर्थे I.1.19; . (2) long
v6wel ऊ substituted for the short उ
of the root गीहु before an affix be-
ginning with a vowel e. g. निगृह्यति ;
cf. ऊदुपधाया गोहृ: P. VI.4.89.
ऊत्व substitution of the long vowel ऊ;
see M. Bh. on P. I.1.12, VI.1.85.
ऊर्दित् marked with the mute indica-
tory letter ऊ: cf. स्वरतिसूतिसूयतिधूञूदिती
बा । prescribing the addition of the
augment इ optionally in the case
of ऊदित् roots P. VII. 2.44.
ऊन deficient, wanting often in com-
pounds e. g..पादीन, द्यून, एकोन: cf.
केयूहैः संपत्समीक्ष्येने R. Pr. VIII. 28: |
एकेयूनाधिकृता सैव निवृदूनाधिका भुरिक् R.
Pr. XVII.1.
ऊध्वेवृहृतीं ( विराज् ) a variety of the
metre Bphat which has three
padas of twelve syllables each; cf.
त्रेये द्वादशीका यस्याः सा हृीध्र्ववृहृती विराट् R.
Pr, XVI.33.
ऊष्मस्रोध name of a combination or
संधि where a visarga is changed
into a breathing ( ऊष्मन् ). It has
got two varieties named ब्यापन्न
where the visarga is charged into a
breathing as for instance in यस्ककुभ:,
while it is called fवक्रiन्त (passed
over) where it remains unchanged
as for instance in य: कंकुभ:, य: पञ्च:
cf. R. Pr. IV. ! 1.
ऊहृ modification of a word, in a
Vedic Mantra, so as to suit the
context in which the mantra is to
be utilised, generally by change of
case affixes; adaptation of a man-
tra: cf. ऊह्यः खल्वपि | न सवंलिंड्ने व
सर्वाभिर्विभक्तिभिर्वेदे मन्त्रा निगदिता: ते च
अवद्यं यज्ञगतेन यथायथं विपरिणमयितव्या: !
M. Bh. on P. 1.1 Ahnika 1.
ऋ
ऊर्यादि a class of words headed by | ऋ fourth vowel in Painis alphabet:
the words ऊरी उररी etc. ending in
the taddhita affix ल्वि, which are
given the designation गति provided
they are related to a verbal acti-
vity, and as a result, which can be
compounded with kpdanta words
ending in त्वं, तुम्, ctc. cf ऊरीकृत्य,
ऊरीकृतम् etc.: Kas on P, I.4.61.
ऊळ tad. affix applied to the words
possessed of long and protracted
varieties and lookcd upon as
cognate ( सवर्ण ) with ल which has
no long type in the grammar of
Phini: cf. R.Pr.I,9: V.Pr.VIII. 3.
(2) unidi suffix च् applied to the
root स्था to form the word स्भृ;
e. g. सव्येष्ठा सारथिः ; cf. स्थ स्थश्छन्दसि
Um Su, II. 101.
वात and बल in the sense of *unable | ऋकार the letter ऋ with its 18 varicties
to bear'; e. g- वानुल:, बळ्ळ: see Kas.
on V. 2.122.
ऊष्मन aspiration letters, spirants call-
ed breathings also: the name is
given to letters or sounds produced
with unintonated breath through
an open posision of the mouth : cf.
विवृतमूष्मणाम् M. Bh, on P. I. 1.10
made up of the हृस्व, दीर्ध, प्ठत, and
सानुनासिक varicties and characteriz-
ed by the thrce accents, ऋ and ल
are looked upon as cognate in
Panini's grammar and hence, ऋ
could be lookcd upon as possessed
of30 varietics including 12 varic-
ties of ल.
Vart, 8. The word refers to the | ऋक्तन्त्र a work consisting of five chap-
letters , ष्, सु, ई, visarga, jihvamपे-
liya, upadhmaniya and anusvra;
cf ऊष्मा वायुस्तत्प्रधाना वर्णा ऊष्माणः R. Pr.
4.12: cf also T. Pr. I.10.
ters containing in all 287 suitras. It
covers the same topics as the Prt-
isakhya works and is looked upon
as one of the Pratisakhya works of

ऋक्प्रतिज्ञाख्य
87
ऋ
the Sama Veda. Its authorship is
attributed toSakayana according
to Nagesa, while औदेत्राज is held as
its author by some, and कात्यायन by
others. It bears a remarkable
similarity to Panini's As!dhyay
especially in topics concerning co-
alescence and changes of स् and न्
to ष् and ण् respectively. It cannot
be definitely said whether it pre-
ceded or followed Panini's work. .
ऋक्प्रातिशाख्य one of the Pratisakhya
works belonging to the Asvalyana
Skh of theRgveda. The work
available at present, appears to be
not a very old one,possibly written
a century or so after Panini's time.
It is possible that the work, which
is available, is based upon a few
ancient Pratisakhya works which
are lost. Its authorship is attribu-
ted to Saunaka.
metrical one and consits of three
books or Adhyayas, each Adhyaya
, being made up of six Patalas or
chapters. It is written, just as the
other Pratisakhya works, with a
view to give directions for the
proper recitation of the Veda. It
has got a scholarly commentary
written by Uvata and another one
by Kumara who is also called
Visnumitra. See अाश्वलायनप्रातिसाख्य
ऋगयनादि a class of words headed
by ऋगयन to which the taddhita
affix अण् ( अ ) is affixed in the
sense of* produced therein ' ( तत्र
भव: ), or * explanatory of * ( तस्य
व्याख्यान: ); cf. ऋगयन भव:, ऋगयनस्य
ब्याख्याने वा अार्गयनः पादव्याख्यानः,
औपनिषदः, शैक्ष: etc. Kas. on P. IV.
3.73.
ऋग्विराम verse-pause equal to 3
matrakalas or three matra units.
cf. ऋग्विराम: पदविरामी विवृत्तिविरामस्समान-
पदविवृतविराम: त्रिमात्रेी द्विमात्र एकमात्रोर्धमात्र
The work is a |
आनुपूर्व्येण T. Pr. xxII. 13. Accord-
ing to Rk. Tantra it consists of
two m्tras.
क्रत् short vowel ऋ. before which the
preceding vowel is optionally left
as it is, i. e. without coalescence
and shortened also if long: cf.
ऋत्यक: P. VI. 1.128.
ऋत्वत् possessed of short ऋ; cf. रीण्त्वतः
संयेोगार्थम् P. VII. 4.90. Vart. 1.
_K - -
ऋदेित् possessed of the mute indica-
tory letter ऋ, signifying in the
Grammar of Papini the preven-
tion of the shortening of the long
vowel in the reduplicated syllable
of the Causal Aorist form of
roots which are marked with it;
e. g. अदादासत् अबबाघत्, अययावत्
5*
etc. cf. नाग्लोपिशास्वृदिताम् P. VII.4.2.
ऋद्ध्यादि a class of words headed by
the word ऋदय to which the tad-
dhita affix क is added in the four
senses prescribed in the rules IV.
2.67-70; e. g. ऋद्यकः, न्यग्रोधक: etc.
cf. P. IV. 2.80.
ऋषिच्छन्द्स् the metre of the Vcdic
seers. The seven metres-गायत्री,
उष्णिक्, अनुष्टुप्, ब्रहृती, पङ्कक्त, त्रिष्टुप् and
जगती consisting respectively of 24,
28, 32, 36, 40, 44 and 48 syllables
are named ऋषिच्छन्दस् as contrasted
with the metres दैव, प्राजापत्य and
आसुर, which, when combined to-
gether, make the metres of the
Vedic seers, For details see R.
Pr. XVI. 1.5.
ऋष्यण् taddhita affix अण् in the sense
of fdescendant applied to names
of ancient sages, by the rule
ऋष्यन्धकवृष्णिकुरुभ्यश्र P. IV. 1.114:
e. g. वासिष्ठ:,वैश्वामित्र:.
ऋ
ऋ long variety of the vowel ऋ.

ऋद्धित
ऋदन्त (roots) ending in छ which
have the vowel ऋ changed into
इर् by the rule ऋत इद्धातेः P. VII.
1.100; e. g. क्रिरति, गिलति.
लों
लछ short vowel ल taken to be a
cognate of ऋ, and described as a
vocalic form of the letter ल.
ल्दित् (roots) marked with the mute
indicatory letter ल, which take
the substitute अ ( अङ्क ) for च्लि, the
. Wikarana of the aorist; e. g.
अपतत्, अदाक्रत् cf. पुषादिद्युताद्यलदित:
परस्मैपदेषु P. III. 1.55.
ए
ए diphthong vowel ए made up of अ
and इ, and hence having कण्ठताढ-
स्थान as its place of origin. It has
no short form according to Panini.
In cases where a short vowel as a
substitute is prescribed for it in
grammar, the vowel इ is looked
upon as its short form. Patanjali
in his Mahabhagya has observed
that followers of the Satyamugri
and Ranayaniya branches of the
Samaveda have short ए ( 1् ) in
their Samaveda recital and has
given सुजाते अश्वसूनृत, अध्वर्यो अद्रिभि:
सुतम् as illustrations: cf. M. Bh. on
I. 1-48; as also the article on.
एक (1) Singular number, ekavacana:
cf न नौ मं मदर्थं त्रिचेकेषु. V. Pr. II.3:
the term is found used in this
sense of singular number in the
Jainendra, Skatayana and Haima
grammars ( 2 ) single ( vowel )
substitute (एकादेश) for two (vowels);
cf एकः पूर्वपरयोः P.VI. 1.84; अथैकमु ू
T Pr K l; ( 3 ) many, a certain
number : (used in pl. in this sense),
{?
9
88 एकद्रव्य
cf. इहृ चेत्येके संन्य， M. Bh. on P. I.
4.21 .
एकर्मक transitive verbs having one
object, as contrasted with द्विक्रमेक्र;
cf ktantra IV. 6. 62
एकतिङ्क possessed of one verb; given
as a definition of a sentence: cf.
एकतिङ्क P.II.1 . ]. Virt 10, explained
by Patanjali as एकतिङ् वाक्यसञ्ज्ञे भवतीति
वक्तव्यम् | ब्रूहि ब्रूहि !
एकदिक् in the same direction, given
as the sense of the tad. affix तस्र by
Panini; cf. तनैकदिक् | तसिश्च	P. IV.
, 3. 1 12, 113.
एकदेइा a part or a portion of the
whole;cf. एकददविकृतमनन्यवत् Pari-Sek.
Pari 37; also M. Bh. Siva-Stºtra 2
Vart 4: एकदोनुवर्तते M.Bh. on P.VI.
1. 93 Vart. 5; cf. also पदेकदज्ञानपि
तान् प्रतीयात् R.Pr. IX. 16.
एकदेशिन् ( a thing or a substance )
composed of parts; cf thc term
एक्रदद्रिसमास or एकददिातत्पुरुष, used in
connection with cormpounds of
words such as पूर्व, पर and others
with words showing the constituted
whole ( एकदेसिन्) prescribed by the
rule पूर्वेपराधरोत्तरोमक्रदेशिनेकाधिकरणे P. II.
2. 1 ; (2) a partisan; cf the word
सिद्धान्त्येकदेशिन् used often by com-
rmentators.
एकदेशाविकृतन्याय the maxim that ' a
thing is called or takcn as that
very thing although it is lacking
in a part,' stated bricfly as एकदा-
विकृतमनन्यवत् Pari. Sek. Pari. 37. The
maxim is given in all thedifferent
schools of grammar: cf Sak Pari.
17: Candra Pari. 15, Kat. Par. Vr.
l, Jain. Par.Vr.l l, Hem.Pari.7 etc.
_K
एकदेशानुमतेि consent to a part of the
whole, admission of one part as
correct.
एकद्रव्य one and the same individual
substance: cf the words एकद्रव्यसम-

एकपद
89
एकवाक्य
वायित्व M. Bh. on P. I. 4. 23, एक-
द्रव्याभिघान on P.VIII.1. 51, एकद्रव्येीप-
निवदिानी given as a definition ofसंज्ञा
M. Bh. on P. I. 4. 1.
एकपद् made up of one word; con-
sisting of one word; cf. अथवा सन्त्ये-
कपदान्यप्यवधारणाान | यथा अब्भक्षे वायुभक्ष: !
अप एव भक्षयति वायुमव भक्षयतिं	M.Bh.
first Ahnika; (2) a continuous
word paraphrased as अखण्डपद and
समानपद by commentators; cf.
तनानन्तरा षष्ठयक्रपदबत् V.Pr.II. 18: (3)
every individual word: cf. बहु
क्रमत तस्यैकपदानि नि:सृजन् R.Pr.XI.18.
एकपदा made up of a single word; cf.
भवति चैतदकस्मिन्नपि एकवर्ण पदम् एकपदा
ऋक् एकं सूक्तमिति	M. Bh. on P.I.
1.2I Vart. 5; (2) made up of one
foot ( चरण or पाद ); cf. एक एकपदेतेषां<
(R.Pr.XVII.24) explained by the
commentator as तषां चतुर्णां पादाना-
मष्टाक्षरादीनां एक: पाद: यस्या:सा एकपदा ऋक्
इत्युच्यते ) .
एकपातिन् combined together: cf. R.
Pr. com. एकपातिनः एकीभूतस्य अक्षरस्य
क्रम धुवमाष ठप्यते: R. Pr. XI. 25, also
XVII.26.
एकभाविन (vowels) combined by rules
of Sarhdhi: cf. क्षेप्रवर्णक्रभाविनाम् R. Pr.
WII.22.
एकमात्रिक (l) possessed of one matra
or mora; (2) a term used for a
short vowel which measures one
matra or mora; cf. एकमात्री हृल्व:
व्यञ्जनानि च ) Ath.Pr.1.60.
एकमुनिपक्ष a view or doctrine pro-
pounded by one of the many
ancient sages or munis who are
believed to be the founders of
a Sastra; a view propounded
only by Panini, to the exclusion
of Katyyana and Patafijali;
cf. एकमुनि'्क्षे तु अन्चो ञ्णितीत्यत्राश्च इति
योगं विभज्य...ळयवस्थितविभाषात्रीक्ता Dur-
ghata-Wrtti I.1.5; see also I.4.24,
II.3.18.
12
एकयोग (1) combination of two Suitras
intoone:cf.अथवा एकयोगः करिष्यते वृद्धिरादै-
जदड्गुण इति M.Bh.P.I.1.3,I.4.59,V.2.
25; (2) one and the same Sitra;cf.
एकयेागृनिर्दिष्टानां सह वा प्रवृति:सहृ बा निवृत्तिः
Pari.Sck.Pari.17; cf.also एकयोगनिर्दि-
टानामप्येकदेशानुवृत्तिर्भवात P. IV. 1. 27,
Vart. 2, Pari. Sek. Pari. 39.
एकयोगलक्षण characterized by i.e.
mentioned in one and the same
rule: cf. एकयेकागलक्षण तुग्दीधेले M.Bh.
on P. I. 1. 62. Vart. 10. See also
M. Bh.on P. VI.1.37.
एकवचन singular number; affix of
the singular numberin Panini's gra-
mmar applied to noun-bases ( प्राति-
पदिक) and roots when the sense of
the singular number is to be conw-
eyed; the singular sense can be of
the form of an individual or colle-
ction or genus. The word एकवच्वन
in the technical sense of singular
mumber is found used in the
Pratisakhyas and Nirukta also.
एकवत्त्व or एकवद्भाव use or treatment
of the plural sense as if it is singu-
lar: cf. एकवद्भावीsनर्थक: 1 समाहृारैकत्वात्
M.Bh. on II. 4.12. Vart. 5.
एकवणे (a pada) made up of a single
letter; _ cf. एकवर्ण पदम् आ, उ इति:
commentary on R.Pr. K.2; cf.
also V.Pr.IV. 144-145 where एकवर्ण
is defined as एकप्रयत्ननिर्वत्र्य capable
of being produced with a single
effort. Panini gives the term अप्ठक्त
to an affix made up of one single
letter; cf.अपृक्त एकाल् प्रत्यय: P.I.2.41.
एकवाक्य an expression giving ome
idea, either asingle or a composite
one. A positive statement and its
negation, so also, a general rule
and its exception are looked upon
as making a single sentence on
account of their mutual expectancy
| even though they be sometimes
| detached from each other cf.

एकविभात
90
एकशेष
चट्इर्थमपि सदेकबाक्यं भवति M. Bh on
[ II. 4. 67: cf. also निर्धघवृाक्यानामपि
|्ध्यविक्षीषार्काङ्क्षत्वाद्विध्येकवाक्यतयैव अन्वयः
तत्रैकवाक्यता पूर्यदासन्यायेन ' सेढइख्यिलु
कार्यकालपक्षे न पृथग्बाक्याथेबांध:	Par. Sek
on Pari. 3. Such sentences are, in
fact, two sentences, but, to avoid
thefault of गेरव, caused by वाक्यभेद,
grammarians hold them to be
composite single sentences.
एकविभाक्त a pada having the same
case in the various dissolutions of
the compound word: e. g. the
word क्रोशाम्बी in the compound
word निष्क्रौढाभिव:, which stands only
in the ablative case ऋौदाम्ब्याः, alth-
ough the word निष्क्रान्त, which stands
for the word निसु, could be used in
many cases. The word नियतविभक्तिकं
is also used in the same sense.
single vrtti or gloss on the
Vedic as well as classical portions
of grammar. Purusottamadeva has
used this term in his Bhasvrtti
to contrast his Vrtti (भाषावृत्ति) with
the Kasikavrtti and the Bhagavrtti
which deal with both the portions;
cf.अनार्षे इयक्रवृत्तावुपयुक्तम् Bhavrtti on
I. 1. 6, cf.also Bhagvtti on III.
4. 99, IV. 3.22 and VI.3.20.एकवृत्ति
is possibly used by Purusottama-
deva in the sense ofमुख्यवृति or साधा-
रणवृति i. e. the common chief gloss
on both the portions.
एकइाब्द् a word having one sense
only, as opposed to अनेकदबद many
words having the same sense or
synonyms which are given in निघण्टुः
as also in अमरक्रोष: cf. अथ यान्यनेकार्थनि
4एकइाब्दानि तान्यतेनुक्रमिष्यामः Nir. IV.1.
एकशेष a kind of composite formation
in which only one of the two or
more words compounded together
subsists, the others being elided;
cf. एकः शिष्यते इतरे निवर्तन्त वृक्षश्च वृक्षश्च
वृक्षौ । Kईk on सरूपाणामेकशेष एक- !
विभक्तौ P. I.2.64; cf. also सुरूपसमुदा-
चेद् विभक्तिर्यं विधीयते | एकस्तत्रार्थवान् सिद्धः
समुदायस्य वाचकः । Bhasavrtti on P. I.
2.64. There is a dictum of gra-
mmarians that every individual
object requires a separate ex-
pression to convey its presence.
Hence, when there is a dual sense,
the word has to be repeated, as
also the word has to be multiplied
when there is a plural sense. In
current spoken language, however,
in such cases the word is used
only once. To justify this
single utterance for conveying the
sense of plurality, Panini has laid
down a general rule सरूपाणामेकशेष
एकविभक्ती and many other similar
rules to cover cascs of plurality not
of one and the same object, but
plurality cased by many objects,
such as plurality caused by ideas
going in pairs or relations such
as parents, brothers and sisters,
grand-father and grand-son, male
and female. For example, see the
words वृक्षश्च वृक्षश्च वृक्षेीः Similarly वृक्षाः
for many trees, पितरो for मातां च
पिता च; देवीं forदेवी च देवश्च: cf. also
the words श्वशूरं, भ्रातरं, गाग्र्य (for गाग्र्य
and गाग्र्यायण),उ|्वम् (for त्वं च अहं च), ी
(for स च यश्च) and गच: fem. अज्ञां fem.
अश्वाः masc. irrespective of the indi-
viduals being some malcs and
some females. Panini has devoted
10 Stºtras to this topic of Eka-
SeSa. The Daiva grammar has
completely ignored this topic.
Patanjali has very critically and
exhaustively discussed this topic.
Some critics hold that the topic
of एकशेघ did not exist in the ori-
ginal Agd',yayi of Panini but it
was interpolated later on, and ad-
duce the long discussion in the
Mahabhasya especially the Prva-
paksa therein, in support of their

एक्ोषानदंइ 91
एकादैइा
argument. Whatever the case be,
the Warttikakara has commented
upon it at length; hence, the
addition must have been made
immediately after Panini, if at all
there was any. For details see
Mahabhasya on I.1.64 to 73 as al-
so,Introduetion p. 166-167, Vol.7
of the Mahabhasya published by
the D. E. Society, Poona.
एकशेषनिर्दशा statement bysubsistence of
one word out of many. The phrase
is very often used in the Maha-
bhasya where the omission of an
individual thing is explained by
saying that the expression used is
a composite one including the
omitted thing along with the thing
already expressed; cf. एकशेषनिर्दो-
यम् | सर्वादीनि च सर्वादीनि च सर्वादीनि !
M. Bh. on I. I. 27, on I. 1. 59,
I, 2.39, as also on I.3.I Vart. 5,I.4.
10l Vart. 3, II. 1.1. Vart. 19 etc.
एकश्रुति that which has got the same
accent or tone; uttarance in the
same tone; monotone. The word
is applied to the utterance of the
vocative noun or phrase calling a
man from a distance, as also to
that of the vowels or syllables
following a Svarita vowel in the
. Sarhhita i.e. the continuous utter-
ance of Vedic sentences; cf. एकश्रुति
दूरात्संबुद्वौ and the foll. P. I.2.33-40
and the Mahabhasya thereon. In
his discussion on I. 2.33 Patafijali
has given three alternative views
about the accent of EkaSruti sylla-
bles : (a) they possess an ac-
cent between the उदात्त (acute)
and अनुदात्त (grave), (b) they are ;
in the same accent as is posses-
sed by the preceding vowel, (c)
EkaSruti is looked upon as the
seventh of thc seven accents;
cf. सैषा शापकाभ्यामुदात्तानुदात्तयेोर्मध्यमक्श्रुति-
रन्तराले द्वियत ...सत स्वरा भवन्ति | उदात्त:,
उदात्ततर:, अनुदात्तः, अनुदात्ततर:, स्वरितः
स्वरिते य उदात्त: सेोन्येन विशिष्ट:, एकश्रुतिः
~ खतमः । M. Bh. on P. I, 2.33.
एकस्वर possessed of one vowel,mono-
syllabic; a term used by Hema-
candra in his grammar for the
term एकाच् of Panini: cf. आद्यांज्ञा
एकस्वरे Hem.IV.1.2, which means
the same as एकाचेा द्वे प्रथमस्यP.WI.1.1.
एकहृलादि having a single consonant
at the beginning: _ cf एकहृलादौ
पूरायेत्यSन्यतरस्याम् P. VI.3. 59.
एकहृल्मध्य (a vowel) placed between
two single consonants; e.g the
vowel अ in पच्इ, रम्, रण्, etc.
एकाक्षर consisting of one single sylla-
ble ; e.g. स्व, भू, वाच् <tc. cf. एकाक्षरा-
त्कृते जातेः सप्तम्यां च न तौ स्मृतौ M.Bh.
on P.V.2.115, as also on VI.1.168,
VI.4.161.
एकाच possessed of a single vowel,
' moiosyllabic: cf. एकावे द्वे प्रथमस्य P.
VI. 1. 1 . _
एकाचपाद name given by Siradeva
and other grammarians to the
first pda of the sixth adhyaya cf
Papirii's As!adhyayi, as it begins
with the sutra एकाचो द्वे प्रथमस्य
VI. 1.1.
एकादेशा a single substitute in the place
of two original units; e.g. ए in the
place of अand इ,or ओ in the place
6f अ and उ. The ddesasor substitu-
tes named पूर्वरूप and पररूप arelooked
upon as ekadesas in Panini's
grammar although instead of
them, the omission of the latter
and former vowels respectively, is
prescribed in some Pratisakhya
works. गुण and वृद्धि are sometimes
single substitutes for single origi-
nals, while they are sometimes
ekadesas for two original vowels
e.g. तवेदम्, ब्रह्मौदन:, उपैति, प्राच्छति, गाम्,
सीमंन्त: etc.; see P.VI.1.87 to ll l,
cf. also A.Pr.II 3.6.

एकादंज्ञास्वर
_K - 92 एणीकृत
एकदेशास्वर an accent prescribed for समर्थ; cf. सुप्सुपा एकार्थम् ( समरूयत ) C.
the single substitute,as, for instance,
by rules like उदात्तस्वरितयोर्यणः स्वरिती-
नुदात्तस्य and the following rules P.
VI.2.4, 5 and 6.
एकान्त part, portion. Augments or
Agamas in the Vyakarana Sवstra
are looked upon as forming a part
|
of the word to which they are ;
attached; cf. अथ यस्यानुबन्ध आसज्यत,
किं स तस्य एकान्तो भवति आर्हींस्विदनक्रान्तः ;
एकान्तस्तत्रेापलध: | M. Bh. on I.3.9,
Vart.9; cf also एकान्ताः Par. Sek.
Pari, 5.
एकान्तर separated or intervened by
one single thing, a letter or a |
word; e. g. अां पचास दवदत्त, where
दवदत्त follows अाम् with one word
पचसि intervening: cf. आम एकान्तरमाम-
न्त्रितमनन्तिके P.VIII. 1. 55.
एकार the letter ए: looked upon as a
diphthong ( संध्यक्षर ) made up of
the letters अ and इ. The combina-
tion of the two constituent parts
is So complete as cannot allow any
of the two parts to be indepen
dently working for samdhi or Tany
other operation with its adjoining |्
letter: cf नाव्यपवृक्तस्य अवयवे तद्विधिर्यथां
द्रव्येषु M. Bh. Siva Sitra 3 Vart. 9.
एकाथे (1) possessed of one sense as
contrasted with बहुर्थ, द्यर्थे ctc: (2)
synonym, cf. बहृवेो fहृ इाब्दा एकार्थीं
भवृन्तुि | तद्यथा इन्द्रः शक्रः पुरुहूतः पुरंदरः |
M. Bh. on I. 2. 45 Vart. 9: (3)
Possessed of a composite sense:
cf. समासे पुनरकार्थानि M. Bh. on II
1. l Vart I. The words घय्काथ्र्य
and एकार्थत्व derived from the word
एकार्थ are often found used in the
sense of "possession of a compo-
' site sense' एकार्थस्य भाव: एकार्थता,एर्की
एकार्थत्वं वा: cf. समासस्यैकार्थत्वंत्सिंज्ञायां
. अप्रसिद्धिः M. Bh. on P. I. 2.42
Wrt 1: cf also the word एकार्थीं-
भाव: (4) potent to be connected:
Vy. II. 2.1; (5) analogous समाना-
धिकरण cf. एकार्थ वनके व ] एकः समानः
अर्थ: अधिकरणं यस्य तदेकार्थे समानाधिकरणम्
Hem. Vy. III. 1.22: cf. also एकार्थ
च | Sak. II. 1.4.
एकाथमाव union of meanings; one
of the two ways in which the
word सामथ्र्य is explained: cf. एकार्थीं-
भावो वा सामथ्र्यं स्याद् व्यपेक्षा वा | M. Bh.
on II. 1.1.
एकाल्ट् possessed of one single pho-
netic element or letter cf. अपृक्त
एकाल् प्रत्ययः P. I. 2.41.
एकीभाव fusion, mixture, union, com-
bination (of 2 or more lettersh; cf.
उदात्तवति एकीभाव उदात्तं सन्ध्यमक्षरम्, R.
Pr.III.6.एकीभव is said to be result-
ing from the coalescence called
अभिनिहितसन्धि, cf. R. Pr. II. 16, 17.
एगेळिग् ( Eggeling ) a well-known
German scholar of Sanskrit
Grammar who flourished in the
l9th century and who edited
the Katantra Vyakarana with the
commentary of Durgasirhha and
many appendices in 1876.
: a brief term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the
two diphthong letters ए and ओ;
cf. एङ्ह्यस्वात्संबुद्धेः P. VI. 1. 69, एड:
पदान्तादति VI. 1.109. etc.
एच् a short term (प्रत्याहृार) in Panini's
grammar standing for diphthongs
or letters ए,ए,ओ, औ, e.g. एचोयवायावं:
P. VI. 1.78, एव इग् हृस्वादेशे p.I.1.48.
एजटेन् [Edgerton, Dr. Franklin] an
American Sanskrit scholar and
author of Buddhist Hybrid Sans-
krit Grammar and Dictionary.'
एर्णीछत A fault in pronunciation
when the voice is indistinct, and
the word pronounced is not dis-
tinctly heard; cf. एणीकृतः अविशिष्ट: ।
क्रिमयमेींकारः अर्थौकार इति यत्र संदेहः Pradipa
on M.Bh.I.1.1,explained as अवशिष्ट:
सेश्लिष्टः संदिग्ध इति यावत् by Nagesa in

एण्य
93
्
his Uddyota. .
एण्य tad. affix एण्य applied to the
word प्रावृष् in the general शैषिक्र
senses; cf. प्रावृष एण्यः ， प्रावृषेण्यः बलाहृक्रः
K्S. on P. IV. 3.17.
एव the vowel ए: cf. ईदूदेद्द्विवचनं प्रगृह्यम्
P. I. 1.11.
एतावत्त्व limitation of the kind: * such
and such ' (words etc.); cf A. Pr.I.
एस्व the substitution of ए: cf. बहुवचने
इङल्येत् (P. VII. 3.103) इति एत्वं प्राप्नोति
M.Bh, on P.V.3.10.
एत्य tad. affix applied to the in-
declinable दूर: e. g. दूरत्य: पथिकः । cf.
दूरदत्यः दूरेत्य: Kas.on P.IV.2.104: cf.
, also दूरादंत्ये वक्तव्यः | दूरत्य: M.Bh. on
P. IW. 2.104.
एदित् marked by the mute indicatory
letter ए. Roots marked with indi-
catory ए do not allow वृद्ध for
their vowel in the aorist: e. g.
अरगीत्, अलगीत्; cf. P. VII.2.5.
एद्यवि tad. affix एद्यवि applied to the |
pronoun पर when the word refers
to a day;cf परा्मन्नहृनि परद्यवि KऋS, on
P.V. 3.22.
प्रद्युसच्इ tad. affix एहुस् applied to the
pronouns पूर्वे, औन्य, अन्यतर, इतर,
अपर, अधर, उभय and उत्तर when the
words so formed refer to a day;
e. g. पूर्वेद्यु, अन्यहुः etc.: cf. P. V.3.22.
एधाच्， tad.affix एधा substituted for the
tad. affix धा optionally,when appli-
ed to the words द्वि and त्रि. e.g.द्विधा,
द्वधा, दैधम्, त्रिधा, त्रधा, त्रैधम्: cf. Ks.ori
एधाच्च P. V. 3.46.
एनप्र tad. affix एन applied to उत्तर, अधर्,
and दक्षिण optionally instead of the
tad. affix आति in the senses of दिक्,
' देढा and काल, e.g. उत्तंरण, उत्तरतः उत्तरात्,
Words with this एन at the end
govern the acc. case of the word
syntactically connected with them.
e. g. तत्रागारं धनपतिगृहृान् उत्तरेण Kºlidasa:
Meghadta;cf.एनपा द्वितीया P.II.3.31.
I
| एप् a term used in the Jainendra
Vyakarana for the term गुण of
Panini standing for the vowels
अ, प्य् and ओी ; cf. ऋतः समादेरपूJain.
Vy. V.2.122.
एफ ending added to the consonant र
when a mention of it is to be
made; cf. T.Pr.I.19: e.g. रफ.
एळिम (1) krt. afix के e.g. पन्वेळिमा
* माषा: cf. P. III. 1.96 Vart. 1: (2)
Unadi afix एलिमच् applied to पत्रं
cf. पव एलिम्बु Un. S.IV.37.
एब्ठ tad-affix वेढ in the sense ofunable
to bear, found in Vedic Literature
only; e.g. हिंमेळ: cf. हिमाचळवेक्तव्यः |
P.Y.2.122 Vart. 7.
एव (l) a particle in the sense of re-
gulation (नियम) ; cf. एवकारः किमर्थः
नियमार्थ: M. Bh. on V. 3.58: (2) .
determinant indeclinable: cf. एव
इत्यवधारोण: cf. इऋतेोवधारणार्थस्तर्हि " यथेवे
विज्ञायेत | अजादी गुणवचनादेवेति M. Bh.
on V. 3.58.
एवकारकरणं use of the word एव्: cf.
उक्तममैवाब्ययन इत्यत्र एवकारकरणस्य प्रये-
जनम्& M. Bh. on P. III. 4.24. . .
ए™L (1) the substitute ए for the per-
fect affix त, substituted for the
whole त by reason of the indica-
tory letter ， attached to ए; cf.
लिटस्तझयेरेदेिरच् and अनेकाल्शत्सर्वस्य P.
III. 4.8l and I. 1.55; ( 2) affix ए
applied to the root चक्षु in Vedic
Literature; cf. नावचक्षे ) नावख्यातव्य-
मित्यर्थ: Kas. on P. III.4.15.
एषितव्य necessary to be sought;
necessary to be prescribed; cf.
तस्मान्मृजेरिग्लक्षणा वृद्धिरेषितब्या M. Bh. on
I, 1.3. Vart. 8.
्
पे diphthong vowel पे : composite
form of अ and ए, also termed दृद्धिं
in Pahini's grammar. _.

एकपदिक 94
ऐकपदिक given in the group of eka-
padasor solitarily stated words
as contrasted with anekapadas or
_
एन्द्र
द्विस्वर vowels in the Rk Pratis-
khya. Sakatayana says they are
द्विमात्र.
synonyms. See एकपद above. टेत् the vowel ए: cf. एत एदित्यैत्वं M.Bh.
एकपद्य treatment as one single word
on P. III. 4.93.
especially found in the case of एत्त्व the substitution of ए for ए by the
, compound words ( सामासिकपद )
which, as a result of such treat-
ment, have only one accent
(acute), and one case afix after
he whole word; cf. अयं खल्वधि
rule एत ए prescribing the substitu-
tion of the vowel ए for ए in the
case of the imperative first person
terminations; cf P. III. 4.93.
बहुव्रीहेरस्येव प्राथमकृपिकुः |्भकंपद्यमेकेवं- |पेन्द्र name of an ancient school of
शैक्राबभक्तित्वं च M. Bh.on P. I.] .29.
. See एकपद्.
एकश्रुत्य possession of the same tone
ot accent; uniformity oftone or
accent. See the word एकश्रुति above;
also see P. I. 2.39 Vart. 1,2; VIII.
1.55 Wart, 1.
एकस्वये having only one principal
accent (Udatta or Svarita) for the
whole compound word which is
made up of two or more indivi-
dual words cf. M. Bh. on P.
, I. 1.29.
एकाथ्ये possession of a single com-
posite sense (by all words to-
gether in a compound): cf संघातस्य
काथ्र्यात् सुबभावे वर्णात् M. Bh. on I.
2.45 Vart 10: cf. also M. Bh. on
II. 2.29 Wart, 7; cf. also नाम
नामेकाथ्यै समासे बहुलम् Hem. III. 1.18
where the commentator explains
एकाथ्र्य as एकार्थींभाव: In the com.
on Hem. III 2.8 एकाथ्र्य is explain-
ed asएकपद्य
टेसू short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) standing for
'the two diphthong vowels एand
औ: cf. न य्वाभ्यां पदान्ताभ्यां पूर्वौ तु ताभ्यामैच्
P. VII. 3.4; cf. एचश्चोत्तरभूयस्त्वात्
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.48, The short
substitutes of t and औ are इ and
उ when prescribed cf. P. I. ] .48;
so also the protracted forms of
' ए and औ are protracted इ and उ;
cf. P. III. 2.106. They are called
grammar and of the treatise also,
belonging to that school, believed
to have been written under
instructions of Indra. The work is
not available. Patafijali mentions
that Brhaspati instructed Indra for
one thousand celestial years and
still did not finish his instructions
in words': (M. Bh. ]. 1. 1 ). The
Taittiriya Sarhhit mentions the
same. Panini has referred to some
ancient grammarians of the East by
the word प्राचाम् without mention-
ing their names, and scholars like
Burnell think that the grammar
assigned to Indra is to bc referred
to by the word प्राचाम्. The Brhat-
kathmafijar remarks that Pahi-
ni's grammar threw into the back-
ground the Aindra Grammar.
Some scholars believe that Kalapa
grammar which is available today
is based uponAindra,just as Cindra
is based upon Pinini's grammar.
References to Aindra Grammar
are found in the commentary on
the Srasvata Vyakarana, in the
Kavikalpadruma of Bopadeva as
also in the commentary upon the
Mahabharata by Devabodha.Cuo-
tations, although very few, are
given by some writers from the
work. All these facts prove that
there was an ancient pre-Paninian
treatise on Grammar assigned to

्
95 ' ओष्ठय
इन्द्र which was called Aindra-Vya-
karana.For details see Dr.Burnell's
*Aindra School of Sanskrit Gram-
marians' as also Wol. VII pages ]
124-126 of Vyakarana Mah∂-
bhasya, edited by the D. E.Society, ]
Poona.
पेप् a term used in the Jainendra |
Grammar instead of the term वृद्धि
of Panini which stands for अा, ए
and औौ: cf P. I. 1. 1.
णेरक् taddhita affixएर applied to the
word चटका in the sense of ofispring
to form the word चाटकैर: cf चटकायां
एरक् P. IV. 1. 128.
द्वि a class of words headed
by the word एषुकारि to which the
taddhita affix भक्त is added in the
sense of * place of residence ': e.g.
एषुकारिभक्तम्, चान्द्रायणभक्तम्: cf Ks.
on P.IV.2.54.
पेरू substitute for the case affix fभम्
after words ending in अ, cf. अतेो
भिस एस्. P. VII. I. 9 to 11.
ओी
ओी (1) diphthong vowel made up of
the vowels अ and उ, termed as
guna in Panini's grammar and
prescribed sometimes in the place
of the vowel उ; ( 2 ) affix ओी app-
lied to the root गम् or गा to form
a noun: cf. ओकारो नामकरण: Nir.II.5.
ओकार the syllable औ called by the
term प्रणव and generally recited at
the beginning of Vedic works.
Patanjali has commented upon
the word briefiyas follows; पादस्य वा
अर्धर्चस्य वा अन्त्यमक्षरमुपसंहृत्य तदाद्यक्षरोद्दाषस्य
स्थान त्रिमात्रमेौकारं त्रिमात्रमोंकारं वा विदधाते
तं प्रणव इत्याचक्षत M.Bh. on VIII.2. 89.
ओीत् the vowel ओ: cf. ओत् PI.1.15,16
prescribing- प्रगृह्यसंज्ञा for Niptas
like आहे, उताहे and others with a
view that the wowel at their end
should not c0alesce with the
following vowel. The Pratiskhya
works prohibit the coalescence of
ओ in many cases with the succeed-
ing vowel; cf. R. Pr. I. 7o; V. Pr.
I.94.
| ओद्रित् marked with the indicatory
letter ओ; roots marked with the
mute letter औ have the Nistha
affix त or तवत् changed to न or नवत्:
e. g- लम:, लञ्जवान्: दीनः, दानवान् etc.
cf. ओदितश्र P VIII, 2. 45; cf. also
स्वादय ओदितः इत्युक्तम् | सूनः सूनवान्: दून:
. दूनव्रान् Si. Kau. on P. VIII. 2.45.
अप्पेठे [Gustav Oppert 1836-1908 ]
a German scholar of Sanskrit
who edited the Sabdanussana of
Sakatayana.
ओीम See औकार above- ओम् consists of
2} mºtras, cf. अर्धतृतीयमात्र एक्र बुवत T.
Pr 18. ]: शैत्यायन says that ओम् has
any one of the three accemts,
while र्कौण्डिन्य says it has प्रचय or
एकश्रुति i. e. absence of any accent.
ओरंभ a scholar of grammar of the
nineteenth century who wrote a
Vrtti on Panini sutras called पाणिनि-
सूत्रवृात. Hehas written many works
on the Prvamimais and other
Sastras.
ओष्ठ Iit. lip; the place of origin
( स्थान ) of the labial letters called
उपध्मानीय वणे i, e the vowels उ, ऊ,
the consonants प्, पू, ब्, भे, मand
the उपध्मानीय letter; cf. ऊपूपध्मानीयान्-
मेाष्ठौ Sid. Kau. on तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं सवर्णम्
P.I.1.9, also उबीपोपध्मा ओष्ठ V. Pr .
I.70.
ओष्ठय lit. produced upon the lip: a
letter ofthe labial class;letters उ,ऊ,
ओी, औ, प्, प्,ब्, भ्,म् and are given
as ओष्ठयletters in the Rk Pratis-
akhya, cf. R. Pr. I. 20. See the
word ओष्ठ above. For the utterance
of the letter व् tips of the teeth. are
also employed; hence the letter व्

_K. S __S
अांस् _ 96 अपश्लेषिक्
is said to have दन्तौष्ठ as its स्थान..
ओीस् the case affix ओीसू of the gen.
and the loc, dual.
SN
अां
अरे ( 1 ) the vowel ओ: diphthong
vowel made up of आ and ओ; ( 2 )
the substitute औौ for the final letter
उ of the word मनु before the fem ,
affix ई: cf मनेोः स्त्री मनायी, मनावी,मनु:
Kas. on P. IV. 1. 38; ( 3 ) case
ending of the nom. and acc. dual
called औौङ्क also.
ओङ्क a term used by ancient gramm-
arians for the affix औौ of the nom.
and the acc. dual. The vowel ई (दी)
is substituted for औौ in the case of
nouns of the feminine and neu-
, ter genders cf. औौड: इी P. VII.
1, 18, 19.
the case ending औौ of the acc.
dual; cf. P. IV. 1. 2.
, अौणादेिक an afix mentioned in the
class of affixes called उणादि in
treatises of Panini and	other
grammarians; cfनमुचिः | मुचेरौणादिकः
केिप्रत्ययः Kas.on P. VI. 3.75; फिडाङ्को
अौणादेकौ प्रत्ययौ M.Bh. on Siva Sutra
2. See the word उणादि above.
. औणादिकपदाणेव a collection of words
called औणादिक: a name given to
his work by पेदुभदृ of the 18th
century.
अौव् (1) the letter औौ included in the
वृद्धि vowels अा, ऐ and औ, and
hence called वृद्धि in Panini's gra-
mmar, (2) substitute for the case-
ending इ ( डि ) in Panini's gra-
mmar: cf. P. VII. 3.118, 119.
pertaining to the ulte-
rior member of a compound cf.
औत्तरपदिके हृस्वत्व (P. VI. 3.61) कृत
तुक् प्राप्नोति M. Bh. on I. 1.62. _
औस्व the substitution of the vowel
, अौ: cf. P. VII. 3.117-119.
अत्साकै an affix or an operation
resulting from the general rule
( उत्सर्ग ); cf. अपत्ये कुत्सित मूढ मनौरो-
त्सार्गकः स्मृत: M. Bh. on IV. 1.161 ;
cf. also एवमप्यौत्सार्गकाणां तद्विषयता नं
प्राप्नोति M. Bb. on IV. 2.66.
अद्वाज an ancient sage and scholar
of Vedic Grammar who is beliew-
ed to have revised the original
text of the ऋक्तन्त्रप्रातिशाख्य of the
Sama-Veda. cf Sab. Kaus. H. 1.8.
अौदुम्वरायण an ancient sage whose
doctrine of * evanescence of
words ' (lit. existence as long as
its cognition is had by the sense
organs) is secn quoted in the
Nirukta; cf. इन्द्रियनित्यं वचनमीदुम्वरा-
यणस्तत्र चतुष्ट्वं नोपपद्यत Nir. I. 1.
ओईशिक enumerated; actually stated;
उद्वदातः प्रोक्तम् अदृशक्रम् cf. न तु
ओदृढक्रामेव Nir. I. 4.
औपचारिक resulting from उपचार or
लक्षणा ; metonymical.
अौपदेशिक mentioned in the original
statement; cf. अन्तग्रहृणं ओोपदशिकांर्थम्
Kas. on ष्णान्ता घट् P. I. 1.24, cf.
also ओपदेर्दिाक्रप्रायोगिकंयोरोपदेशिकसैयव ग्रहृ-
णम् Par. Sek. Pari. 120.
औपमन्यव name of an ancient etymo-
logist referred to by Yska in his
Nirukta possibly as a commenta-
tor on निघण्ट्: cf. निगन्तव एव सन्तीं
निगमनान्निघण्टव उच्यन्त इत्येतिोपमन्यवः Nir.
I. 1. line 4.
अपामेक figurative metaphorical ap-
plication or statement: cf. ( विराट् )
पिपीलिकमध्या इत्यैोपमिक्रम् Nir. VII. 13.
ऊौपश्लेषिक resulting from immediate
contact immediately or closely
connected; one of the three types
of अधिक्ररण or location which is
given as the sense of the locative
case: cf. अधिकरणे नाम त्रिप्रक्रूरं-5यापक्रम्
ओपश्ठाबकम्, वैषयिकमिति ... इको यणाच |
अाचि उपाश्लिष्टस्येति | M. Bh. VI. 1.72.

अौपसंख्यानिक
97
e>
औौपसंख्यानिक subseguently stated by
way of addition or modification
s done by the Varttikakaras: cf.
औौपसंख्यानिकस्य णस्यापवादं: | अारंपर्यक्र
मनुष्यः Ka on P. IV. 2. 129: cf.
, also KS. on V.1.29 and VI.3.41.
औरस produced from the chest ; the
Wisajaniya and h (हुकार्) are look-
ed upon as औरस and not ऋछ by
Somg ancient phoneticians: cf. क्रार्ध-
' दाचार्याः एतौ ह्यकरेविसर्जनीये उर:थानांवि्-
न्ति com on R, Pr. I. 18: cf. also
हृक्रारं : संयुतम् | उरस्ये
तं विजानीयात्कण्ठचमाहुरसं । Pan.
Siks. 16. हुरसंयुतम्
और्स्य produced from the chest. See
अरस, _
औ， substitute ओ for the nom.ana
acc case endings applied to the
ja अष्टन्: cf अष्टाभ्य औट् P. VII.
21.
ओोषिणहु beginning with a stanza of
the Usjih mere: cf. उष्णिह्यपूर्वेः सती-
इत्यन्तुः प्रगाथः औष्णिह्य इत्युच्यते | येथा.यमे-
दित्यासो अदुहुः Uvata onR.Pr.xVIIf.5.
* -- ( अनुस्वार )
+ अनुस्वार or nasal (l) looked upon
as a Phonetic element, indepen-
dent no doubt, but incapable of
bcing Pronounced withouta vowel
Preccding it.* Hence, it is shown
in writing with अ althoughits form
in writing is only a dot above the
line cf अ इत्यनुस्वार: | अकार इहृ उचारणार्थं
' इति बिन्दुमात्रां वर्णानुस्वारसंज्ञी भवेत Kr.
Vyak :!!9; (2) anusvra,showing
or signifying Wikrai.e. अागम and
used as a technical term for the
second विभक्ति or the accusativecase.
See the word ओ above on page 1.
: ( विसर्ग )
' विसर्जनीय or विसर्गः lit. letting out
13
breath from the mouth; sound or
utterance caused by breath escap-
ing from the mouth; breathing.
The Visarjanjya, just like the
anusvara, is incapable of being
independently uttered. Hence, it
is written for convenience as अ:
although its form for writing pur-
poses is only two dots after the
vowel preceding it; cf. अः इति
विसर्जनीयः | अकार इहं उच्चारणार्थः इति कुमारी-
स्तनयुगाकृतिर्वेणे विसर्जनीयसंज्ञो भवति Kat.
Vyak. I. 1.16. See अ: above on
page 2: _
< ( जिह्वामूलीय )
X जिह्वामूलीय, a phonetical element
or unit called Jihvamiliya, pro-
duced at the root of the tongue,
which is optionally substituted
in the place of the Visarga (left
0ut breath) directly preceding the
utterance of the letter ， or ख्
and hence shown as < क्. See
अ>कू above on page 2.
9 ( उपध्मानीय )
% उपध्मानीय lit. blowing: a term
applied to the visarga when
followed by the consonant प्र or .
The upadhmaniya is looked upom
as a letter or phonetic element,
which is always connected with
the preceding vowel. As the
upadhmaniya is an optional sub-
stitute for the visarga before the
letter प्र or पू, when, in writing,
it is to be shown instead of
the visarga, it is shown as
9, or as o , or even as xjust as the
Jihvamliya; cf. उपध्मायत शब्दायते इति,
उप समीपे ध्मायते इाब्द्यत इति वा com. on
Kat. I: : cf also कपाभ्यां प्रागर्धविसर्गसदृद्दौ
जिह्वामूलीयोपध्मानीयै:S.K.on P.VIII.2.1.

क्
अ ( नासेक्य )
* नासिक्य, a nasal letter or utterance
included among the अयेोगवाहृ letters
analogous to anusvra and yama
letters. It is mentioned in the
" Wajasaneyi Pratisakhya as ई इति
नासिक्य: on which Uvvata makes
the remark अयमृक्ङाखायां प्रसिद्ध:. The
Rk-Pratisakhya mentions नासिक्य,
यम and अनुरूवार as नासिक्य or nasal
letters, while Uvvata defines नासिक्य
• as a letter produced only by the
mose: cf. केबलनासिकया उच्चार्यमाणे वर्ण
नासिक्य: Uvvata on R. Pr. I. 20.
The Taittirya Pratisakhya calls
the letter इ as nasikya when it is
followed by the consonant न् or ण्
or म् and gives अह्नाम् , अपराहे and
ब्रह्म as instances. The Painiya
Siks does not mention नासेक्य as
a letter. The Mahabhasya men-
tions नासिक्य as one of the six
ayogavaha letters; cf. क पुनरयेी-
गवाह्याः | विसर्जनीयजिह्वामूलीयेोपध्मानीयानु-
रवारानुनासिक्ययमा: M. Bh. on Siva-
sfitra 5 Wart. 5, where some
manuscripts read नIारीक्य for अानुना-
सिक्य while in some other manus-
cripts there is neither the word
आनुनासिक्य nor 'नासक्य. It is likely
that the anunsika-colouring given
to the vowel preceding the conso-
nant सू substituted for the conso-
nants म, न् and others by P. VIII.
3.2. to 12, was looked upon as a
separate phonetic unit and called
नासेक्य as for instance in संस्कर्त, मा
हिं★ी:, संझिट्राध etc.
& ( यम )
YK यम, a letter called यम which is
uttered partly through the nose.
A class consonant excepting the
fifth, when followed by the fifth
wiz. ङ्क, ऋ, णु, न or म् , gets doubled
in the Vedic recital, when the
second of the doubled consonant
which is coloured by the follow-
ing nasal consonant is called यम.
This यम letter is not independent.
It necessarily depends upon the
following nasal consonant and
hence it is called अयोगवाहृ. The
nasalization is shown in script as
-s followed by the consonant: e.
g. पलिक् *ती, अगृने, etc. The pro-
nunciation of this yama or twin
letter is seem in the Vedic recital
only: cf. पलिक्क्नीं ... कचगधेभ्यः परे
तत्सदृढा एव यमा: S. K. on P. VIII.
2. 1. cf , बु गु ' इति यमाः पिंढाति-
संख्याक्रा भवन्ति V. Pr. VIII. 24.
क
(l) the consonant क्: the first con.
sonant of the consonant group as
also of the guttural group; (2)
substitute क् for consonants ， and द्
before the consonant सु ;cf.V.P.2.41.
For the clision ( लेप ) of क् om ac-
count of its being termcd इत् see
P.I.3.3 and 8.
क.(l) tad.affix क applicd to the words
of the ऋदय group in the four senses
called चातुरर्थिक c. g. ऋ|्यक्र:, अनडुत्क:,
वेणुक्र: etc., cf. P.IV. 2.80; (2) tad.
affix क applied to nouns in the
sense of diminution, censurc, pity
ctc. c. g. अश्वक्रः, उदूक:, पुत्रक:, cf. P.V.
3.70-87: (3) tad. affix के in the very
sense of the word itself ( स्वार्थे ) e.g.
अविक्र:, यावक्र:, कालक्र:; cf. P.V. 4.28-
33; (4) Undi affix क e.g. कर्क, चक्र,
राक्र, एक, भक, काक्र, पाक, इाल्क etc. by
Unidi stras III. 40-48 before
which the angment इट् is prohibit-
ed by P. VII. 2.9; (5) krt affix क
( अ ) where क् is dropped by P. I.
3.8, applied, in the sense of agent,
to certain roots mentioned in
P.III.1.135, 136, 144, III. 2.3 to

ककार
99
कण्ठघ
|
7, III.2.77 and III.3.83 e.g. बुध:, !
प्रस्थः, ग्रहृम्, कम्बलदः, द्विप:, मूलविभुज:,
सामग*, सुराप: etc.; (6) substitute क
aor the word क्रिम् before a case affix,
cf. P.VII.2.103; (7) the Samasanta
affix क्रप् ( क ) at the end of Bahu-
vrihi eompounds as prescribed by
P. V. 4.151-160.
ककारt the consonant क्र: cf. वर्णात्कार: P.
III.3.108 Vart. 3.
कंसाविजयगणि a Jain grammarian who
wrote a commentary by name
इांच्दचन्द्रिकंीद्धार on the सारस्वतव्याकरण.
कक्योदि a class of words headed by
the word क्रक्रीं, the word प्रस्थ after
which in a compound, does not
have the acute accent on its first
vowel. e. g. क्रक्रप्रस्थः; cf. P. VI.2.87.
कच्छादि a class of words headed by
कच्छ to which the taddhita affix अणु
is added in the miscellaneous
( शैषिक ) senses, provided the word,
to which the affix अण् is to
be added, is the name of a
country; e.g. ऋषिकेषु जात: अाईक::
similarly माह्मिषक्र:, एक्ष्वाक:: cf. Kas.
on P.IV.2.133.
tad. caturarthika affix क्र (I) by P.
IV. 2.80 after words headed by
वराहृ, e.g. वराहृकः, पलादाकः; (2) by
P.IV.4.21, after the word अपमित्य
e.g. आपमित्यक्र:
कञ् krt, affix ( अ ) affixed to the root
दृट् preceded by त्यद्, तद् etc. by P.
IV. 2.60 e.g. तादृशा:, यादृढा: etc., fem.
तादृशी by P. IV.1.15.
कटच .tad.affix कट affixed to सं, प्र, उद्
and अव by P.V.2.29, 30; e.g. संकट,
प्रकट etc.
कट्यच् tad. affix कटय affixed to the
word रथ in the sense of collection
by P.IV.2.5l e.g. रथकटया,
कडारादि a class of words headed by
the word कडारwhich, although adje-
Actival,are optionally placed first in
the Karmadharaya compound, e.g.
कडारजैमिनि: जैमिनिक्रडार:; cf Kas. on
II.2.38.
कर्णादि (1) a class of words headed
by कर्ण to which the taddhita affix
अायन ( फिञ् ) is applied in the four
senses given in P. IV.2.67-70; e.g.
कार्णायनिः वाासष्ठायनि: etc.; cf Kas. on
P. IV.2.80; (2) a class of words
headed by कर्ण to which the taddhita
affix जाहृ (जाहृच) is added in the
sense of a *root e.g. कर्णजाहृम् ; cf.
Kas. on P.V.2.24.
कण्टकोद्धार name of a commentary on
Nagesas Paribhasendusekhara by
Mannudeva, known also as Mantu-
deva or Manyudeva, who was a
pupil of Payagunde in the latter
halfof the 18th century.
कण्ठ glottis: cavity in the throat
holding vocal cords; the place of
the production of the sounds अ, अI
and हृ: cf. अह्यावेसर्जनीयाः कण्ठे V, Pr.I.
71: cf, also कण्ठयीsकारः प्रथमपञ्चमौ च
R.Pr.I.18.
कण्ठतालव्य gutturo-palatal. The diph-
thongs ए and ए are called Kantha-
tlavya, as they are produced in
the Kanghatalu-sthana. _
कण्ठोक्त formally mentioned directly
mentioned.
_K -s _
कण्ठीष्ठय, कण्ठौष्ठघ gutturo-labial, the
diphthongs ओ and औ are called
Kanthosphya as they are produc-
ed at both the Kantha and the
Ostha Sthanas. _:
कण्ठय produced at the throat or at
the glottis; * the vowel अ, visarga
and the consonant द् are called
कण्ठयं in the Pratisakhyas, while
later grammarians include the
guttural consonants कू, रव, ग्, घ and
ङ्क among the Kanthya letters cf.
अकुहृविसर्जनीयानां कण्ठः Sid. Kau.on
तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं सवर्णम् P. I. 1. 9. See
कण्ठ. _

100
कण्हृादि
करण
कण्डुादि a group of words which are
ºaded by the word कण्ड् and whigh
are either nouns or roots or boh>
to which the affix य is added to
arrive at the secondary ro9ts eः .
कण्डुयति, कङ्कयते; हृणीयति, हृ¶ीयते, महीयते
8, बाहुप्रक्ररंर्णाद्धातुः कस्य चासञ्जनादुपिं
ओहृचाभिमे द्यां मन्ये धातुर्विभाषितःl Ks.
on P. III.1.27.
of Bahuvrhi compounds e.g. व्यूढ-
रस्कः, बहुदण्डिका, बहुकुमारीकृ9 व्क्र्क्र:,
&f P. V4.151-154 For its prohibi-
tion, see P. V.4.155-100.
क्रमोणपाद् name given by Sradeva
and other grammarians to the
second pda of the third adhyaya
of Phini's Astadhyayi, which
begins with the sutra कर्मण्यणु P.
[[I. 2.1 .
कण्वादि a class of words forming a कमुळ krt. affix अम् inVedic Litera-
portion of the class of words cali-
3d मगद, and headed by the
word कण्वे, to the derivatives of
which, formed by the afix य by
ore in thc sense of the infinitive,
c. g. धिभाजं in आमं वै देवा थिभीजं
न्इक्नुवन् : cf. P.III.1.12.
the rule गर्गादिभ्ये यद् (P.IV. 1.105) कमप vibration of the larynx which
the affix अण् is added in the misce-
produces thc sound.
llaneous senses; e.g. क्र्: छत्र कस्पन a fault in uttering an accent--
similarly गौकक्षाः, दाकल:, अगरुतयः,
कुण्डिना: etc: cf. P.IV.2.1 i l . and LI.
4.70. _
कत्रयादि a class of words headed by
the word क्रत्रि to which the tad.
affix एयक (ढकढ) is applied in the
miscellaneoussenses e.g. कात्रेयक्र:,
ed vowel espccially a vowcl with
the circumflex accent which is not
properly uttered by the Souther-
hers as remarked by Uvvata cf
ऋपनं नाम स्त्ररश्रितपाठदेशप: | स च प्रायेण
दाक्षिणात्यानां भवति | स च धुर्यः	Uvvata
on R. Pr. III.18.
ग्रामेयक्र:, कौलेयक्र: (from कुल्या) ; cf. P. कम्पित the same as क्रपन. Sce कम्पन
IW.2.75.
above.
कथादि a class of words headed by कम्बोजादिं a class of words headed
the word कथा to which the affix इक्र
(ठकू) is added in the sense of
*good therein' (तत्र साधु:); e.g.
क्राथिक्र:, वैतण्डिक्रः, गाणेक्र:, अायुर्वेदकः:
cf. P.IV. 4.102.
कयै, कध्येन् krt affix अय of the
by the word क्रुधेज, the affix अम्
placed after which is clided, pro-
vided the words क्रम्चेञ्ज and others
are names of countries; e.g. कम्ीज्ञ:
न्वेोल:, केरल:, इकः, यवन: ctc. cf. P.
IV. 1.175.
iffinitivein Vedic Literature: cf. | *" (1) lit. instrumcnt the term
तुमर्थे संस...कथैकध्यैन् ..तधन: P.III.4.9.
कन् (1) undi affix as in the words
एक, मेक्र, दाल्क etc; (2) tad.affix क्र as
given by Panini sपेtras IV.2.13 l,
IV,3.32, 65, 147, IV.4.21; V.1.22,
23, 51, 90, V.2. 64, 65, 66, 68-75,
77-82, V.3.51, 52, 75,81,82,87, 95,
96, 97. V.4.3,4,6, 29-38.
कप् (l) krt affix क्र prescribed after
the root दुहृ e. g- कामदुघ, cf. P.III.2.
70;(2) the Samsnta अ at the end
signifies the most efficient means
for accomplishing an act; cf.
क्रियासिद्धो येत् प्रकृष्टोपकारकं विवक्षिते
तत्साधकतमं कारकं करणसंज्ञं भवति, Kas.
on साधक्रतमे करणम् P. I. 4.42,
e. g. दात्रेण in दात्रेण लुनाति; (2) effort
inside the mouth ( अाभ्यन्तर-प्रयत्न )
to produce sound e. g. touching
of the particular place ( स्थान )
inside the mouth for uttering
consonants cf. स्पृष्टे रूपूर्णानां करणम् M.
Bh. on P, I. 1.10 Vart. 3; (3)

करविणी 101
disposition of the organ whlch
produces the sound; cf. धारूनादी-
भेयानां विशेष: करणमित्युच्यते | एतच्च पाणिनि-
सेमताभ्यन्तरप्रयत्न इति भाति | Com. on R.
Pr, XIII.3;cf also स्थानकरणानुप्रदानानि
M. Bh. on I. 2. 32: cf also
अनुप्रदानात्संसर्गात् स्थानात् करणविन्ययात् !
जायते वर्णवैशेष्यं परीमाणाच्च पञ्चमात् T. }'r.
XXIII. 2 where karana is describ-
ed to be of five kinds अनुप्रदान (i. e.
नाद or resonance), संसर्ग (contact),
स्थान, करणविन्यय and परिमाण: cf. अकारस्य
तावत्-अनुप्रदानं नादः, संसर्गः कण्ठ, स्थानं
हृन्, केरणर्विन्ययः ओष्ठौ, परिमाणं मात्राकू !
अनुप्रदानाद्भः पञ्चभिः करणैर्वेणीनां वैशेष्यं |
कस्थभावक
produces the fruit or result of an
action without depending on any
other instrument: cf. स्वतन्त्रः कर्ता P.
I. 4.54, explained as अगुणीभूते य:
क्रियाप्रसिद्धौ स्वातन्त्र्येण विवक्ष्यते तत्कारकं कतृ-
संज्ञ भवति in the KSik on P. I.
4. 54. This agent, or rather, the
word standing for the agent, is
put in the nominative case in the
active voice (cf. P. I.4.54), in the
instrumental case in the passive
voice (cf P. II. 3.18), and in the
genitive case when it is connected
with a noun of action or verbal
derivative noun, (cf. P, II. 3.65).
जायते Com. on Tai. Pr. XXIII. 2. क्यक् the affix य of the passive
The Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya men-
tions two karanas संवृत and विवृत;
cf. द्वे कर्णे संवृतविवृताख्ये बायेर्भवतः W.
Pr. I. 11: (4) use of a word e.g.
इतिकरणंi, वत्करणम्: cf. क्रिमुपस्थितं नाम !
अनार्षे इतिकरण: M.Bh.om. P.VI.1.129.
करविर्णी or कर्विणी name of a svara-
voice where the object functions
as the subject: e. g. यंकू in ल्यते
केदारः स्वयमेव, cf. अच: क्यांक P. VI.
1.95 and the Kasika thereon.
कर्तवेदना experience (of something)
by the agent himself; cf. सुखादिभ्य:
कवेदनायाम् P. III. 1.18.
bhakti .i. e. behaviour like the कर्वंसाधन (an affix) applied in the
vowel ल, noticed in the case of|
the consonant ळ when followed
by the sibilant हृ: cf. करेणु रहृयोर्योगे |
sense of the agent of an activity;
भवतीति भावः | कतृसाधनश्चायं प्रत्ययः M.
Bh. on P. I. 3.1. Wart. 7.
_ - _=#an - o
कर्विणी ，कारयें | र्द्ीि रसान् च हारिता | कर्हस्थक्रय (a root) whosc activity is
लद्दाकारयेः | करेणुः बर्हः । कार्वेणी मलहृ:
Com. on T. Pr. XXI. 15. See
स्वरभक्ति.
करिणी name of a svarabhakti i. e.
behaviour like the vowel ऋ
noticed in the case of the cons0-
nant र्. when it is followed by हृ
e. g. बहिः. करिणी is named करेणु also.
करिष्यत् करिष्यन्ती ancient technical
terms for the future tense:the word
करिष्यन्ती is more frequently used.
कर्णमूलीय produced at the root of
found functioning in the subject:cf.
यत्र क्रियाकृतविंहेषदर्शनं कर्तरि Kaiyata on
P. III. I. 87 Vart. 3. Such roots,
, although transitive do not have
any Karmakartari construction by
the rule कर्मवत्कर्मणा तुल्यक्रिय: P. IIf.
1.87. as e.g. ग्रामं गच्छति देवदत्त: has no
कर्मकर्तरि construction; cf. कर्मस्थभाव-
कानां कर्मस्थक्रियाणां वा कर्ता कृमेवद् भवतीति
वक्तव्यम् | कस्थभावकानां कतृस्थक्रियाणां बा
कत कर्मवन्मा भूदिति M. Bh. on III.
1.87. Vrt, 3. _
the ear the utterance of a cir- क्स्थभावक (a root) whose action or
cumflex vowel is described as
Karnamliya.
कर्वे agent of an action, subject;
name of a karaka or instrument
in general, of an action, which
happening is noticed functioning
in the subject; e.g. the root स्मृ. cf.
कर्तस्थभावकश्चायं ( स्मरतिः ) M. Bh. of
I. 3.67, कतृस्थभावकश्च शेति: (शीधातुः)
M. Bh. on V.3.55. ' .: : .:::

कर्वेभिप्राय 102
कर्मन्
कर्वेभिप्राय meant for the agent of
the action. The word is used
in connection with the fruit or
result of an action; when the
result is for the agent, roots
having both the Padas get the
Atmanepada terminations cf.
स्वरितञ्जितः क्रत्रभिप्राय क्रियाफले P. I. 3.72.
कमेक object of the transitive verb
which functions as the subject
when there is a marked facility
of action: e.g.ओदन is karmakartari-
object, functioning as subject,
in पृच्यते ओदनः स्वयमव. The word
कर्मक्रतुं is used also for the कर्मकर्तरि
प्रयेोग where the object, on which
the verb--activity is found, is
turned into a subject and the
verb which is transitive is turned
into intransitive as a result.
कमेधारय name technically given to
a compound-formation of two
words in apposition i. e. used in
the same case, technically called
समानाधिकरण showing the same sub-
stratuto; cf. तत्पुरुषः समानाधिकरणः कर्म-
धारय: I 2.42. The karmadharaya
compound is looked upon as a
variety of the tatpurusa com-
pound. There is no satisfactory
( explanation of the reason why
such a compound is termed कर्म-
धारय. Sakatyana defines Karma-
dharaya as विशेषणं व्यभिचारि एकाथे
कर्मधारयंश्च where the word विशेषण is
explained as व्यावर्तक orभदक (distin-
guishing attribute) showing that
the word क्रर्म may mean भेदकक्रिया.
The word कर्मधारय in that case
could mean कर्म भदकक्रिया, तां धारयति
अरौ कर्मधारय: a compound which
gives a specification of the thing
in hand.
कमेन् (l) object of a transitive verb,
defined as something which the
agent or the doerofan action wants
primarily to achieve. The main
feature of कर्मन् is that it is put in
the accusative case : cf. कर्तुरीप्सिततमं
क्रमे, कर्मणि द्वितीया: P. I. 4.49; II.3.2.
Panini has made कर्म a technical
term and called all such words
*karman as are connected with a
verbal activity and used in the
accusative case; cf. कर्तुरीप्सिततमे
कर्म: तथायुक्तं चानीप्सितम्: अकार्थतं च and
गतिबुद्धिप्रत्यवसानार्थशब्दकर्माकर्मकाणामणि कर्त
स णे P.I.4.49-52;cf also यत् क्रियत तत्
कर्म Kat. II.4.13, क्रत्रौप्यम्Jain I. 2.
120 and क्तार्थौप्यं कर्म Hem. II. 2. 3.
Sometimes a kraka, related to
the activity ( क्रिया) as sarhpradina,
apadna or adhikaratha is also treat-
ed as karma, if it is not meant or
desired as apdana,sarhpradima etc.
It is termed अकथितक्रर्म in scuh cascs;
cf. अपादानादिविक्रिष्चक्रथाभिरर्विवक्षितमक्रथितम्
Kas. on I.4.51. See the word
अकथित above. Karmam or object
is to be achieved by an activity or
क्रिया: it is always syntactically con-
nectcd with a verb or a verbal deri-
vative.When connected with verbs
or verbal derivatives indcclinabl-
es or words ending with the affixes
उक्र, क्त, क्तवतु, तृन् , ctc, it is put in
the accusative casc. [t is put in
the genitivc case when it is con-
nected with affixcs othcr than those
mentioned above; cf. P, II. 3.65,
69. When, however, thc karman
is expressed ( अभिहृित ) by a verbal
termination ( तिङ् ), or a verbal
noun termination (वृत्), or a noun-
affix ( तद्धित ), or a compound, it is
put in thc nominative case. e.g.
कटः क्रियते, कट: कृतः, इत्य:, प्राप्तोदक: ग्रामः
etc. It is called अभिर्हित in such
cases;cfP.II.3.1.Sec the word अन-
भईित above.The object or Karman
which is ईप्सिततम is described to be
of three kinds with reference to
the way in which it is obtained

I03
कर्मव्यतिहार
कमेनामन्
from the activity. It is called विक्रायै
when a transformation or a change |
is noticed in the object as a result
of the verbal activity, e. g. काष्ठानि
भस्मीकरोति, घटं भिनति ete. It is called
प्राप्य when no change is seen to
result from the action, the object
only coming into contact with the
subject, e. g. ग्रामं गच्छति, आदित्यं पद्यति
etcIt is caiedनिवैत्र्यwhen the object |
is brought into being under a
' specific name; e.g. घटं करोति, ओदनं
पचति: cf. नित्यं च विकार्यं च प्राप्यं वति
' त्रिधा मतम् | तत्रेप्सिततमम् Padamanjar
on I. 4.49: cf. also Wakyapadya
III.7.45 as also Nyasa on 1.4.49.
The object which is not ईप्सिततम
is also subdivided into four kinds
e. g. (a) अनीप्सित (ग्रामं गच्छन् ) व्याघ्र
प्यति, (b) औदासीन्यन प्राप्य or इतरत्
or अनुभय e. g, ( ग्रामं गच्छन् ) वृक्षमूलानि
उपसर्पतेि, ( c ) अनाख्यात or अकथित e.g.
बालं in बलिं याचते वसुधामू (d) अन्यपूर्वक
e.g अक्षान् दीव्यति, ग्राममभिनिविदांत; cf.
Padamafijari on I.4 49, The com-
mentator Abhayanandin on Jain-
endra Vyakarana mentions seven
kinds प्राप्य, विषयभूत, निवैत्र्य, विक्रियात्मक,
ईप्सित, अनीप्सित and इतरत्, defining
कमे as कर्ता क्रियया यद् आप्यं तत् कारकं
कर्म; cf. क्रत्रीप्यम् Jain. Vy. I.2.120
and com. thereon. जेनन्द्रमधीते is
given therein as an instance of
विषयभूत. (2) The word कर्मन् is also
used in the sense of क्रियंो or verbal
' activity: cf. उदेनूध्र्वकर्मणि P. I. 3.24;
आदिकर्मणि क्तः कर्तरि च P.III.4.71, कर्तरि
कर्मव्यतिहृर P. I.3.14. (3) It is also
used in the sense of activity in
general, as for instance,the sense of
a word; e. g. नामाख्यातयेोस्तु कर्मापसेयेीग-
द्योतका भवन्ति Nir. I. 3.4, where Dur-
( अर्थ ).
gacarya explains karman as *sense' |
कमेनामन् lit. noun showing action, |
participle.
कमेप्रवचनीय a technical term used in
].
connection with a preposition
which showed a verbal activity
formerly, although for the present
time it does not show it: the
word is used as a technical term
in grammar in connection with
prefixes or उपसर्गs which are not us-
ed along.with a root, but without
it cf. क्रमं प्रोक्तवन्तः कंर्मप्रवचनीयाः इति
M.Bh. on P. I. 4.83; e.g. शाकल्यस्य
संहृितामनु प्रावर्षत्, अन्वर्जुनं येोद्वार:, अा कुमारं
यज्ञाः पाणिंन:; cf. KS. on P. I.4.83
to 98.
कर्मवद्भाव the activity of the agent or
kart of an action represented as
object or karman of that very ac-
tion, for the sake of grammatical
operations: e. g. भिद्यते काष्ठं स्वयमेव;.
करिष्यते कट: खयमव. To show facility
of a verbal activity on the object,
when the agcnt or karta is dispen-
sed with, and the object is looked
upon as the agent, and used also
as an agent, the verbal termina-
tions ति, त: etc. are not applied im'
the sense of an agent, but they
are applied in the sense of an ob-
ject consequently the sign of the
voice is not अ (दाप्), but य ( यक् )
and the verbal terminations are त,
आताम् etc. ( तड् ) instead of ति,
तस् etc. In popular language the
use of an expression of this type
is called Karmakartari-Prayoga.
For details see M. Bh. on कर्मवत्कर्मणा ?
तुल्यक्रिय: P. III. 1.87. Only such
roots as are कर्मस्थक्रियक्र or कर्मस्थभावक्र
i. e. roots whose verbal activity
is noticed in the object and not
in the subject can have this Kar-
makartari-Prayoga.
कर्मव्यतिहार exchange of verbal acti-
vity; reciprocity of action; कर्मव्यति-
हृार् means क्रियाब्यातह्यर or क्रियाविनिमय;
cf. कर्तरि कर्मव्यतिहृरे P. I. 3.14.; also
कर्मव्यतिहृरे णच् स्त्रियाम् | व्यावक्रोशी,
व्यात्युक्षी Kas. on P. III. 3.43.

कमेसाधनं
The roots having their agents
characterized by a reciprocity of
action take the Atmanepada ter-
minations; cf. P. I. 3.1.
कर्मसाधन prescribed in the sense of
an object; a term used in the
Mahabhsya in the sense of
affixes used in the sense of
*object as contrasted with कतृसाधन
orभावसाधन: e. g. the affix किं in the
word विधि, explained as भिधीयते इति
विधि: or in the word भाव explained
as भाग्यत यः स भावः; cf. क्रियां चैव हिं
भाव्यत, स्वभावसिद्धं तु द्रव्यम् M.Bh. on P.
I. 3.1. See similarly the words
समाहृार M.Bh. on II. 1.51 and उपाधि
M.Bh. on V. 1.13.
कमेस्थाक्रिय (roots) having their verbal
activity situated in the object: e.g.
' the root अव + रुध् in अवरूणद्धि गाम् or
, the root कृ in करोति कटम्: cf. कर्मस्थभा-
व्कानां कर्मस्थक्रियाणां च P. III. 1.87
, Vart. 3.
कमेस्थभावक (roots) having their verbal
action or happening noticed in the
object: e. g. the root आमू and इी in
बालमासयति इाययति wherc the function
of the root bears effect in the
Object boy and not in the move-
ments of the object as in the
sentence बालमवरुणद्धि. See कर्मस्थक्रिय
above as also M.Bh. on III. 1.87
. and Kaiyata on the same.
कर्मादि lit karman and others: a term
often used in the Mahabhasya for
karakas or words connected with
a verbal activity which have the
object or karmakaraka mentioncd
first: सुपां कर्मादयोप्यर्थाः संख्या चैव तथा
तिडाम् M.Bh, on I. 4.21.
कर्मापदिष्ट operations prescribed speci-
fically for objects i. e. prescribed
in the case of objects which are
described to be functioning as the
subject to show facility of the
verbal action: e. g. the vikarana
104
कलापिन्
यक् or the affix च्णि; cf. कर्मापदिष्टा विधय:
कर्मस्थभावकानां कर्मस्थक्रियाणां वा भवन्ति |
कस्थभावक्रश्च दीपादयः M.Bh.on I.1.44.
कर्विणी A kind of svarabhakti. See
क्ररक्षिणी.
कर्षण extension; protraction, defined
asklaviprakarsa by commentators;
a peculiarity in the recital as
noticed in the pronunciation of ट
when followed by च् , or ड् whej
followed by ज् e.g. षट्चै; षड्जात. cf.
Nar. Sik. I.7.19.
वर， a fault of pronunciation conse-
' Guent upon directing the tongue
to a place in the mouth which is
not the proper one, for the utte-
rance of a vowcl; a vowel so pro-
nounced; cf. संवृतः कलः ध्मात: ... रामदा
इति	cf.also निवृत्तकलादिकामवर्णस्य प्रत्यवातं
वक्ष्यामि M.Bh. Ahnika 1.
कलाप (कलाप-्याकरण) alternative name
given to the treatise on grammar
written by Sarvavarman who is
believd to have lived in the days
of the Sitavhana kings. The trea-
tise is popularly known by the
namc Kitantra Vyākarana. The
available trcatisc,viz. Kalpastitras,
is much similar to thc Kitantra
Sपेtras having a few changes and
additions only here and thcrc.it is
rather risky to say that Kalpa
was an ancient system of grammar
which is referred to in the Prini
Stºtra कलापिनेोय् P. IV. 3. 108. For
details see क्रातन्त्र'.
कलापरत्न a commentary on the kraka
portion of the Kalpa grammar as-
cribed to the famous commentator
Durgasirhha.
कलापसंग्रहृ a commentary on the
Kalapa Sutras.
कलापिन् the author of the work re-
ferred to as Kalapa in the Mah-
bhya which perhaps was a work
om grammar as the word क्राळप is
__

कल्प 105
mentioned with the word
in the Mahabhasya, cf. M.Bh. on
कलापिनींSयू P. IV.3. 108. Kalpin is
mentioned as a pupil of Vaisam-
pyana in the Mahabhsya; cf.
वैशम्पायनान्तवासी क्लापी M.Bh. on P.
IV.3. 104.
कल्प the tad. affix कल्पप् added to any
substantive in the sense of slightly
inferior, or almost complete; e.g.
पट्कल्प:, मृदुकल्पः: cf. P. V. 3. 67 and
Kasik thereon.
कल्पन, कल्पना suppositioh, assumption;
cf गुणकल्पनया च भिक्षुनटसूत्रयोश्छन्दस्त्वम्
KS. on P. IV.3. l 10; cf. also अनेक-
कृिष्टकल्पनापेक्षया अस्या उचितत्वात् Pari.Sek.
on. Pari. 94.
कल्पनालाघव brevity of thought: bre-
vity of expression: minimum
assumption. See the word लाघव.
कल्पप् tad. affix कल्प. See कल्प.
कल्पलता name of a commentary on
Bhattoj's Praudhamanorama ' by
KrsnamiSra. !
कल्मन् the same as karman or
object of an action especially
when it is not fully entitled to be
called karman, but looked upon
as karman only for the sake of
being used in the accusative case;
subordinate karman, asfor instance
the cow in गां पये दोग्धि. The term
was used by ancient grammarians;
gf विपरीतं तु यत्कर्म तत् कल्म कवयो विदुः
M.Bh. on P.:I. 4. 51. See कर्मन्.
कल्याण्ामछ author of the commentary
Sabdaratnadipa on the Sabdaratna
of Hari Diksita.
कल्याणसरस्वती author of the Laghus-
arasvata, a small grammar work.
He lived in the 18th century
A. D. -
कल्याणसागर author ofthe Haimaling-
nusasana-vivarana, a commentary
on the Liiignussana chapter of|
14
कसुन
Hemacandra's grammar. He lived
in the 16 th century A. D.
कल्याण्यादि a class of words headed
by the word ढल्याणी to which the
taddhita affix एय (ढक्) is add-
ed, in the sense of * offspring ?
and, side by side, the ending इन्
( इनड् ) is substituted for the last
letter of those words; e. g. काल्या-
णिनय:, सौभागिनय:: cf. Kas. onP. IV.
1.126.
कवर्ग the class of guttural consonants
क्र
consisting of the five consonants
कू, 1्, ए, घ् ङ् _
लपदुम a treatise on roots wri-
tten by Bopadeva, the son ofKes-
ava and the pupil of Dhanesa who
lived in the time of Hemadri, the
Yadava King of Devagiri in the
thirteenth century. He has written
a short grammar work named
Mugdhabodha which has been
wery popular in Bengal being
studied in many Tols or Patha5-
als,
कविकल्पदुमटीका a commentary on the
Kavikalpadruma, written by the
author ( बोपदेव ) himself. It is kno-
wn by the name Kavyakmad-
henu; ( 2 ) a commcntary on
Kavikalpadruma by Ramatarka-
vagSa. -
क्रविचन्द्र author of a small treatise on
grammar called Sarasatvari. He
lived in the seventeenth century
A.D. He was a resident ofDarbha-
fg. JayakrSna is also given as the
name of the author of the Sarasa-
tvar grammar and it is possible
that Jayakrsha was given the title,
or another name, Kavicandra.
क|्यप name of a writer on the
Candra Wykarana.
कसुन् krt affix अस् found in Vedic
Literature, in the sense of the
infinitive: e. g. ईश्वरो विलिख: ( विळि-

106
कसेन कातन्त्र
खितुम्) cf. P. III. 4.13, 17. The declension, syntax compounds
word ending in this बसुन् becomes noun-affixes ( taddhita affixes )
an indeclinable: cf कृत्वातेसुन्कसुन: conjugation, voice and verbal
P. I. 1.40.
कसेन् krt affix असे in the sense of
the infinitive in Vedic Literature ;
e. g. प्रेष, श्रियसे: cf. Kas. on P. III.
4. 9.
कस्कादि a class of compound-words
headed by कस्क्र in which the
visarga occurring at the end of
the first member is noticed as
changed into सु against the usual
rules e. g. कंस्क:, क्रौतस्कुतः भ्रातुष्पुत्र:,
सद्यस्काल:, धनुष्कपालम् and others; cf.
P. VIII. 3.48. As this कस्कादिगण
is said to be अाकृतिगण, similar
words can be said to be in the
कस्कादिगण although they are not
actually mentioned in the गणपाठ.
का a technical term used in the
Jainendra Vyakarana for the term
पञ्चमी used in Pahini's grammar.
काण्ड tad. affix क्राण्ड prescribed after
words like दूर्वा, तृणे, क्रर्म in the
sense of समूहृ; cf दूर्वादिभ्यः (v. 1.
पूर्वादिभ्यः) काण्डः; Ks on P.IV. 2.51.
काण्डमायन name ofan ancient writcr
of a PratiSakhya work who held
that Visarga before the consonant
स् is dropped only when स् is
followed by a surd consonant; cf.
Tai.Pr. IX. 1.
कातन्त्र name of an important small
treatise on grammar which
appears like a systematic abridg-
ment of the Astadhyayi of Pnini.
It ignores many unimportant
rules of Panini, adjusts many,
and altogether omits the Vedic
portion and the accent chapter of
Pahimi. It lays down the Sutras
in an order different from that of
Panini dividing the work into |
four adhyayas dealing with
technical terms, sarhdhi rules,
derivatives in an order. The total
number of rules is 1412 supple-
mented by many subordinate
rules or Warttikas. The treatise
is believcd to have been written
by Sarvavarman, called Sarvavar-
man or Sarva or Sarva, who is
said to have lived in the rcign
of thc Stavahana kings. The
belief that Prmini refers to a work
of Kalpin in his rules IV.
3.108 and IV. 3.48 and that
Patanjali's words - कल्पम् and
माहृावार्तिकम् support it, has not
much strength. The work was
very popular espccially among
those who wanted to study spoken
Sanskrit with ease and attained
for several year a very .promi-
nent place among text-books on
grammar especially in Bchar,
Bengal and Gujarat. [t has got
a large number of glosscs and
commentary works, many of
which are in a manuscript form at
present. Its last chapter ( Catur-
tha-Adhyaya) is ascribcd to Vara-
ruci. As thc arrangement of
topics is entircly different from
Panini's order, inspite of consi-
derable rcscrnblance of Stras and
their wording, it is probable that
the work was based on Pini
but composed on the modcls of
ancient grammarians viz. Iradra,
Sakatayama and others whose
works,although not available now,
were available to the author.
The grammar Kitantra is also
called Kºlpa. A comparison of
the Katantra Stºtras and the
Kalapa Stras shows that the
one is a different version of
the other. The Katantra Gram-

कातन्त्रकौमुदी 107
mar is also called Kaumāra as it
is said that the original 1nstruc-
tions for the grammar were re-
ceived by the author from
Kumara or Karttikeya. For de-
tails see Vol. VII Patafijala
Mahabhasya published by the
D. Society, Poona, page 375.
कातन्त्रकीमुदी (i) a commentary on
the Katantra Stºtras written by
Govardhana in the 12th century.
A. D.; (2) a commentary on the
Katantra Stras ascribed to Gah-
geSasarman.
कातन्त्रचन्द्रिका a gloss on the com-
mentary ofVararuci on the कातन्त्रसूत्र
ascribed to Hari Dºksita of the
17th century if this Hari Dºksita
is the same as the author of the
Sabdaratna.
वतन्त्रधातुवृत्ति ascribed to Durga-
sirhha, the famous commentator
of the Ktantra Stras who lived
in the nineth or the tenth century.
कातन्त्रघातुवृतटीका a commentary
ascribed to Ramanatha and call-
ed Manoram on the Katantra-
dhtuvrtti of Durgasirhha. See
कातन्त्रधातुवृति above.
कातन्त्रपञ्जिका a name usually given to
a compendium of the type ofViva-
rana or gloss written on the K3-
tantra Sitras. The gloss written by
Durgasirhha on the famous com-
mentary on the Katantra Stºtras by
Durgasirhha ( the same as the
the famous Durgasirhha or
another of the same name )
known as दौर्गसिंहृी वृत्ति is called
Katantra Pafijika or Katantra-
vivarana. A scholar of Katantra
grammar by name Kusala has
written a Paijik on दुर्गसिंहृ's वृत्ति
which is named प्रदीप, Another
scholar, Trivikrama has written a
gloss named Uddyota.
कातन्त्रपरिभाषापाठ name given to a
text consisting of Paribhassitras,
believed to have been written by
the Sitrakara himself as a supple-
mentary portion to the maim
grammar. Many such lists ofPari-
bhastras are available, mostly
in manuscript form, containing
more than a hundred Stitras divi-
ded into two main groups-the
Paribhassifras and the Balabala-
sणेtras. See परिभाषासंग्रहृ ed. by B. O.
R. I. Poona.
कातन्त्रपरिभाषावृत्ति (1) name of a gloss
on the Paribhaspatha written
by BhavamiSra, probably a Mai-
thila Pandit whose date is not
known. He has explained t 2 Pari-
bhass deriving many of them from
the Ktantra Suitras. The work
seems to be based on the Paribhs
works by Vyadi and others on the
system of Panini, suitable changes
having been made by the writer
with a view to present the work as
belonging to the Katantra school;
(2) name of a gloss on the Pari-
bhaspºtha of the Katantra school
explaining 65 Paribhass. No name
of the author is found in the Poona
manuscript. The India Office
Library copy has given Durgasirhha
as the author's name; but it is
doubtfud whether Durgasirhha was
the author of it. See परिभाषासंग्रहृ ed.
by B. O. R. I. Poona.
कातन्त्रपरिशिष्ट ascribed to Sripatidatta,
whose date is not known; from a
number of glosses written on this
work, it appears that the work
was ' once very popular among
students of the Katantra School.
कातन्त्रपरिशिष्टचन्द्रिका a gloss om the
Katantra-Parisista ascribed to a
scholar named Ramadasa-cakra-
vartih who has written another...

कातन्त्रपार्ष्टटीका
108
कातन्त्रोत्तर
work also named Kitantravy्-
khyasara.
कातन्त्रपरिशिष्टटीका a gloss on the
Katantra-Parisista written by a
Kºtantra scholar Pujdarikksa.
कातन्त्रपारीशीष्टप्रद्योत a gloss on the
Katantraparisisa by Goyicandra
in the twelfth century.
कातन्त्रपरिनििीष्टसिद्धान्तरत्नाङ्कुर a gloss
on the Katantra-parisista by Siva-
rmendra, who is believed to have
written a gloss on the Sitras of
Panini also.
कातन्त्रप्रक्रिया a name given to the K-
tantra Sitras which were written
in the original form as a Pra-
kryagrantha or a work discussing
the various topics such as alpha-
bet, euphonic rules, declension,
derivatives from nouns, syntax,
conjugation derivatives from roots
etc. etc.
कातन्त्रभ्रदीप a grammar work written
by a scholar named Kusala on the
Katantrastravrtti by Durgasimpha.
See कातन्त्रपाञ्जक्र.
कातन्त्रबालबोधिनी a short explanatory
gloss on the Katantra Stºtras by
Jagaddhara of Kashmir who lived
in the fourteenth century and who
wrote a work on grammar called
ApaSabdanirkarama.
तन्नरूढस्य a work on the Katantra
Stras ascribed to Ramnatha
Widyavacaspati of the sixteenth
century A. D.
कातन्त्ररूपमाला a work, explaining the
various forms of nouns and verbs
according to the rules of the
Katantra grammar, ascribed to
Bhavasena of the fifteenth century.
कातन्त्रलधुवृात a short gloss on the
Katantra Stras ascribed to a
scholar named Chucchukabhatta.
कातन्त्रविघरण a commentary on the
Kनुtantravistara of Vardhamana
by Prthvidhara who lived in the
fiftcenth century A. D.
कातन्त्रविस्तर a famous work on the
Katantra Grammar written by
Vardhamma a Jain Scholar of the
twelfth century who is believed to
be the same as the author of the
well-known work Gajjaratna-
mahodadhi.
कातन्त्रवृति name of the earliest com-
mentary on the Ktantra Stras
ascribed to Durgasirhha. The
commentary was once very popu-
lar as is shown by a number of
explanatory commentarics writtcn
upon it, one of which is believed to
have been written by Durgasifinha
himself. See Durgasirhha.
कातन्त्रवृतिटिप्पणी a gloss on दौर्गसिंहृवृक्ष
written by Gunakirti in the four-
teenth century A.D.
कातन्त्रवृत्तिटीका a commentary ora
Durgasirhha's Kitantravrtti by
Moksesvara in the fifteenth cen-
tury A.D.
कातन्त्रवृत्तिव्याख्या named Agamafi-
gala on Durgasirhha's Kitantra-
vrtti written by Rimakisora Cakr-
avartin who is believed to have
written a grammatical work शाब्दबो-
धप्रक्राज्ञिक्रा.
कातन्त्रव्याख्यासार a work of the type
of a summary written by Rima-
disa Cakravartin of the twelfth
century.
कातन्त्रसूत्रवृत्ति an old Wrtti on the
Kitantra Stºtras ascribed to Wara-
ruci who is, of course, different
from Vararuci Kityyana. The
Vrtti appears to have been occu-
pying a position similar to that of
Durgasirhha.
कातन्त्रोक्तर् a treatise on the Katantra
Grammar believed to have been
written by Vidyananda.

कात्थक्य 1
09 कारके
कत्थच्य an ancient writer of Nirukta
guoted by Yaska in his Nirukta.
कात्य (i) another name sometimes
given to Katyyana to whorm is
ascribed the composition of the
Warttikas on Panini-stras; (2) an
ancient writer Ktya quoted as
a lexicographer by Ksrasvamin,
Hemacandra and other writers.
कात्यायन the weli-known author of the
Warttikas on the stitras of Panini.
He is also believed to be the
author of the Vajasaneyi Prti-
Sakhya and many stra works
named after him. He is believed
to be a resident of South India on
the strength of the remark प्रियतद्धिता
दाक्षिणात्याः made by Patajali in
connection with the statement *यथा
लौकिकवैदिकेषु'which is looked upon as
Katyyana's Varttika. Some schol-
ars say thatVararuci was also ano-
ther name given to him, in which
case the Warttikakara Wararuci
Katyayana has to be looked upon
as different from the subsequent
writer named Vararuci to whom
some works on Prakrit and Katan-
tra grammar are ascribed. For
details see Mahabhasya Vol. VII.
pages I93-223 published by the D.
E.Society, Poona.See also वार्तिकपाठ
below.
कानच् affix अान forming perfect part-
ciples which are mostly seen in
Vedic Literature. The affix कान्
is technically a substitute for the
लिट् affix. Nouns ending in कृान्च्
govern the accusative case of the
houns connected with them: e.g.
सोमं सुषुवाणः; cf. P. III. 3.106 and
P. II. 3.69.
काम् augment आम् applied to दुष्णीम्
just.as अकच् is applied, egः
ऋल तूष्णीकामे M. Bh. on V.3.72.
कामचारः option; permission to do as
desired liberty of applying any of
the rules of grammar that present
themselves; cf. तत्र कामचारो गृह्यमाणेन
बा विभक्तं विशेषायतुं अङ्कन वा M. Bh. on
P.I.1.27 Vrt. 6.
कामधेनु abridgment of काव्यकामधेनु of
Bopadeva; the word is also used
as a short form for काव्यकामधेनु.
कामधेनुसुधारस a commentary on the
Kavyakmadhenu by Ananta, son
of Cintamani who lived in the
sixteenth century A. D.
कामम optionally: at will; cf. काममति-
दिट्रयतां व्रा M. Bh. on H.1.57.
काम्यच् affix in the sense of * desiring
for oneself ' applied to nouns t6
form denominative roots; e.
पुत्रकाम्यति; cf. काम्यच P. III, 1. 9.
कार an affix, given in the Pratisakhya
works and,by Katyayana also in his
Vartlika, which is added to a letter
or a phonetic element for conve-
nience of mention; e.g. इकारः, उकारः ;
cf. बर्ण: कारोत्तरो वर्णाख्या, वर्णकारी निर्ददार्क
Tai. Pra.I. 16: XXII.4.:cf, also V.
Pr. 1.37. It is also applied to sylla-
bles or words in a similar way to
indicate the phonetic element of
the word as apart from the sense
of the word: e. g.' यत एवकारस्तती-
न्यत्रावधारणम् Vyak. Paribhas , cf.
also the words वकार:, हिंकारः: (2)
additional purpose served by a
word such as an adhikara word;
cf. अधिकः कारः , पूर्वविप्रतिषेघा न पठितव्या ?
भवत M. Bh. on P. I. 3.11.
कारक lit. doer of an action. The
Lword is used in the technical sense ;
1 of *instrument of action'; cf कारक-
इाब्दश्च निमित्तपर्यायः । कारकं हेतुरिति नार्था-
न्तरम् ) कस्य हेतुः ， क्रियायाः Ks. on P. I.
4.23: cf. also कारक इति संज्ञानिर्दयः |
साधकं निर्वर्तकं कारकसंज्ञे भवति [ M.Bh. on
P. I. 4.28. The word *kraka' in
short, means *the capacity in which
a thing becomes instrumental in

_K 110
कारककाांगेका
bringing about an action '. This
capacity is jooked upon as the
sense of the case-affixes which
express it. There are six kirakas
given in all grammar trgatises
अपादान, संप्रदान, अधिकरण, करण , कमेन् and
क्रई to express which the case affixes
or Vibhaktis पञ्चमी, चतुथीं, सतनी, तृतीया,
द्वितीया and प्रथमा are respectively
used which, hence, are called
Krakavibhaktis as contrasted with
Upapadavibhaktis, which show a
relation between two substantives
and hence are looked upon as
weaker than the Karakavibhaktis;
cf. उपपदविभक्तेः कारकविभक्तिर्वलीयसी Pari.
Sek. Pari.94. The topic explaining
Krakavibhaktis is looked upon as
a very important and difficult
chapter in treatises of grammar
and there are several small com-
pendiums written by scholars deal-
ing with krakas only. For the
' topic of Krakas see P. I. 4.23 to
55, Kat, II. 4.8-42, Vyakarana
Mahabhsya Vol. VII. pp.262-264
published by the D. E. Society,
Poona.
कारककारिका possibly another name
for the treatise on Karakas known
as कारक्रचक्र written by Purusotta-
madeva the reputed grammarian
of Bengal who lived in the latter
half of the twelfth century A. D.
See कारक्रचक्र.
कारककौमुदी a work on the Katantra
grammar discussing the Karaka
portion.
कारकरवण्डनमण्डन also called षट्कुार्क-|
खण्डनमण्डन which is a portion of the
author's bigger work namcd त्रिळा-
चनचान्द्रक्रा. The work is a discourse
on the six karakas written by
Manikantha, a grammarian of the
Katantra school. He has also
written another treatise narned
Krakavicara,
कारकवाचे
कारकचक्र (I) written by Purusotta
madeva a reputed grammariar
of Bengal who wrote many works
on grammar of which the Bhag.
vtti, the Paribhivrtti and.j.
Pakasamueccya deserve a special
mention. The verse porti6n o]
the Krakacakra of which the
prose portion appears like a
commentary might be bearing
the name Krakakaumud. _
कारकटीका a work on Krakas as-
cribed to Bhairava.
कारक्तक्व a treatise on the topic of
Kirakas written by Ckrapani-
SeSa, belonging to the famous
Sea family of grammarians, who
lived in the seventeemth century
A. D.
कारकनिर्णय a work discussing the
various Karakas from the
Naiyyika view-point written by
the well-known Naiyayika, Gad्-
dhara Chakravartin of Bengal,
who was a pupil of Jagadisa and
who fourished in the 16th cen-
tury A. D. He is looked upon as
one of the greatest scholars of
NyayaSastra. His main literary
work was in the field of Nyaya-
Sastra on which he has written
several treatiscs.
कारकपरिच्छेद् a work dealing with
Krakas ascribed to Rudrabhatta,
कारकपाद् name given by Sivadeva
and other grammarians to the
fourth pada of the first adhyaya
of Paninis Asadhyayi which be-
gins with the Sitra कारके I. 4. 1
and which dcals with the Kira-
, kas or auxiliaries of action.
कारकवाद (1) a treatise discussing the
several Krakas, written by
Krsnasastri Arade a famous .Nai-
: yayika of Benares who lived in
l the eighteenth century A. D; (2)

कारकवेचार 111
कायै
a treatise on syntax written by |
Jayaramabhattcarya which is
called कारकाविवेक also, which see
संक्षिप्तसूत्रबहृथेसूचक: श्लोक्र: कारिका Pada-
vyavasthastitrakarik of Udaya-
kirti.
below. कारित (1) ancient term for the
कारकविचार a work on Krakas as-
cribed to Manikantha. See Kra-
kakhadanamandana above.
कारकविभक्ति case afix governed by
a verb or verbal derivative as
contrasted with उपपदावेभाक्त a case
affix governed by a noun, not
possessing any verbal activity.
See the word कारक above, See
also the word उपपदविभाक्ति.
causal Wikarana, ( णिव in Panini's
grammar and इन् in Kद्वtantra);
(2) causal or causative as applied
to roots ending in णिच् or words
derived from such roots called
also *nyanta' by the followers of
Paini's grammar; cf. इन् कारितं
धात्वर्थे Kat. III. 2.9, explained as
धात्वर्थक्रियानाम्न इन् परो भवति धात्वर्थे स व
क्रारितसंज्ञक्र: !
कारकविभक्तिबलीयस्त्व the dictum that कार्तकौजपादि a class of words headed
a Karaka case is stronger than
an Upapada case,"e. g. the accu-
sative case as required by the
word नमस्कृत्य,which is stronger than
the dative case as required by the
word नमः. Hence the word भुनित्रये
has to be used in the sentence :
मुनित्रयं नमस्कृत्य and mot the word
मुनित्रयाय cf. उपपदविभक्तेः कारकविभक्ति-
बलीयसी Pari. Sek. Pari. 94.
कारकविलास an anonymous elemen-
tary work on syntax explaining
the nature and function of the
six Karakas.
कारकविवेक known as कारकवाद also;
a short work on the meaning and
relation of words written by Jaya-
ramabhattacārya who lived in the
beginning of the eighteenth cen-
tury. The work forms the con-
cluding portion of a larger work
called कारकववेक which was written
by शिरोमणिभट्टाचार्य.. The work
कारकवाद has a short commentary
written by the author himself
कारकव्याख्या the same as कारकवादव्याख्या
written by जयरामभट्टाचार्य. See कारक-
कारिका a verse or a line or lines in
metrical form giving the gist of
the explanation of a topic; cf.
by the word कार्तकौजप, which are
all dvandva compounds, and
which have their first member
retaining its own accent; e. g.
कार्तकौजपौ, आवन्त्यन्मका: etc. cf. Kई.
on P. VI. 2.37.
कार्तिकेय the original instructor of the
Katantra or Kilapa Grammar,
to Sarvavarman who composed
the Sutras according to inspira-
tion received by him. The Ka-
tantra, hence, has also got the
name Kaumara Vyakarana.
कार्मनामक the word is found used in
Yaska's Nirukta as an adjective to
the word संस्कार where it means
*belonging to nouns derived from
roofs (क्रमेनाम)"like पाचक्र,कर्षक etc.The
changes undergone by the roots in
the formation of such words i. e.
words showing action are termed
कार्मनामिकसंस्कार; cf. कमेकृतं नाम कर्मनाम
तस्मिन् भव: कार्मनाभिक्र: Durgavrtti on
Nir. I,13.
(l) brought.into existence by
activity (क्रियया निर्वृते कार्यम् ) as oppo
sed to नित्य eternal: cf. एके वर्णाञ्ज
शाश्वतिकान् न कार्यीन् R.Pr.. XIII.4 cf
also ननु च यस्यापि कार्याः ( शब्दाः ) तस्यापि
पूजार्थम् M. Bh. on I. 1. 44 Wart.
17;(2) which should be done, used

कार्यकाल 1 12
काइाऋत्स्न
in connection with a grammatical
operation: cf. कार्य एवे सुयमीकारमाहु : |
अभेष्म इत्येतस्य स्थाने अभयौष्मेति	R.Pr.
xIV,16: cf also विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् P.
I.4.2; (3) a grammatical opera-
tion as for instance in the phrases
द्विकार्ययोगे, त्रिकार्ययेगे etc.; cf. also
गौणमुख्ययेभुख्ये कार्यसंप्रत्ययः Par. Sek.
Pari. 15;(4) object of a transitive
verb: cf. ीषः कायै Sk.
कार्यकाल along wi h the operation cf.
कार्यकालं संज्ञापरिभाषम् , rules laying
down technical terms and regulat-
ing rules are to be interpreted
along with the rules that prescribe
or enjoin operations ( provided
the technical terms occur in those
rules, or, the regulating rules con-
cern those rules). See Pari. Sek.
. Pari 3.
कार्यकालपरिभाषा one of the important
Paribhs, regarding the applica-
tion of the Paribhāga rules. See
कायैकाल. For details see Par. Sek.
Pari. 3.
कार्यातिदेशा looking upon the substi-
tute as the very original for the
sake of operations that are caused
by the presence of the original:the
word is used in contrast with रूपातिदेशं
where actually the original is re-
stored in the place of the substitute
on certain conditions. For details
see Mahabhasya on द्विर्वचनवि P.
1.1.59.
कार्यिन् the word or wording that
undergoes the operation : cf. सतो हिं
कार्यिणः कार्येण भवितव्यम् M. Bh. on I.1.
I..Vart. 7, also कार्यमनुभवन् हि कार्य
निमित्ततया नाश्रीयते Par. Sek. Pari. 10.
काळ notion of time created by differ-
ent contacts made by a thing with
other things one after another.
Time required for the utterance of
a short vowel is taken as a unit of
time which is called मात्रा or
क्रालमत्रा, lit. measurement of time;
(2) degree of a vowel, the vowels
being looked upon as possessed of
three degrees हृस्व,दीधे,& कुत measur-
ed respectively by one, two and
three matrs; cf. ऊकालेSत्रस्वदीर्घप्लुतः
P.. 2.27; (9) time notion in gene-
ral, expressed in connection with
an activity in three ways past
( भूत), present ( वर्तमान ), and future
{ भविष्यत् ) to show which the terms
भूता, वर्तमाना and भविष्यन्ती were used
by ancient grammarians; cf the
words पूर्वकाल, उत्तरकाल; also cf. पाणि-
न्युपज्ञमकालकं व्याकरणम् Kas. on P. II.
4.21 ; (4) place of recital ( पाठददा )
depending on the time of recital,
cf. न परकालः पूर्वकाले पुनः (V.Pr.III. 3)
a dictum similar to Panini's पूर्वत्रा-
सिद्धम् P. VIII. 2.1.
काळदुष्ट a word not sanctioned by
rules of grammar. The word pro-
bably refers to the corruption tak-
ing place in connection with the
use of a word on account of lapse
of time: cf. कालदुष्टा अपदब्दाः IDurgh.
Vr. on II.2.6.
कालनिदर्शक signifying time; cf. काल-
निदीकाः प्रत्यया एत डट् लिट् लट् इत्यादयः.
कालभेद् difference in the time of
utterance: cf. किमुच्यत विवारभदाद्विति !
न पुनः कालभेदादपि । M. Bh. on Siva
Sutra 1.
काळव्यवाय interval of timme: cf. अान्य-
भाव्यं तु कालशब्दव्यवायात् ) , कालब्यवायात् !
दण्ड अग्रम् / M. Bh. on Siva Sitra 1.
काठसामान्य time in genera: unspeci>
fied time: cf. वर्तमाने लडुक्तः कालसामान्ये
न प्राप्नोति K. on P.IIf,3.142.
धेळ name of the comm-
entary by Bopadeva on his own
work कविकल्पदुम. See कविकल्पदुम.
कराक्रुत्स्न (l)an ancient grammarian
and philosopher referred to in the
Mahabhasya; (2) the work on
grammar by KSakrtsna; cf.पाणिनिना

काज्ञाााद
113
क्रः
प्रोक्तं पाणिनीयम् ， आपिशलम् ， काढाकृत्स्नम् !
M.Bh. on I.1. Ahnika 1.
कारादि a class of words headed by
the word काढा to which the taddhita
affix इल is affixed in the four senses
stated in P.IV.2.67-70 e.g. कादिीलम्,
कर्दमिलम् etc.: cf. Kas. on P.IV.2.80.
काशिका (1)name given to the reputed
* gloss (इति) on the Sutras of Panini
written by the joint authors.jaya-
ditya and Vamana in the 7th
century A.D.Nothing definitely can
be said as to which portion was
written by.jayaditya and which by
Vamana, or the whole work was
jointiy written. Some scholars
believe that the work was called
Kasik as it was written in the
city of Ks and that the gloss
on the first five Adhyayas was
written by Jayaditya and that on
the last three by Vamana. Although
it is written in a scholarly way,
the work forms an excellent help
to beginners to understand the
sense of the pithy Sitras of Panini.
The work has not only deserved
but obtained and maintained a
very prominent position among stu-|
dents and scholarsof Paninisgram-
mar in spite of other works like the
Bhºsavrtti, the Prakriy Kaumud,
the Siddhanta Kaumudi and others
written by equally learned scholars.
Its wording is based almost on the
Mahabhasya which it has followed,
avoiding, of course, the scholarly
disguisitions occurring here and
there in the Mahabhasya. It ap-
pears that many commentary
works were written on it, the well-
known among them being the Ksi-
kavivaranapajik or Nyāsa written
by Jinendrabuddhi and the Pada-
ma्jar by Haradatta. For details
seeVyakaranamahabhasyaVol.VII
pp 286-87 published by the D. E.
15
Society, Poona. ( 2 ) The name
KSlika is sometimes found given
to their commentaries on sta-
ndard works of Sanskrit Grammar
by scholars, as possibly they were
written at Kash; as for instance,
(a) Kasik on Vaiyakaranabhपsama-
sara by Hari Diksita, and ( b )
Kasik on Paribhasendusekhara by
Vaidyanatha Payagunde.
काज्ञिकाविवरणपञ्जिका also called Nyasa,
the well-known commentary
written by Jinendrabuddhi on the
Kasik of Jayaditya and Vamana.
See Ksika above.
काइिाकावृतिसार a commentary on the
Ksikavrtti named अमृतस्रत by
VaranavateSa-strin.
काढयप name of an ancient gramma-
rian quoted by Panini, possibly an
author of some Pratisakhya work
now lost.
काइयपीवृत्ति name of a gloss on the
Candra Vyakarana.
कार्श्यादि a class of words headed by
the words काशि, वदि and others to
which the taddhita affixes ठञ् and
ञ्जिठ are added in the miscellaneous
senses: e. g. कादिाक्रो, कादिका: वैदिकी,
वैदिका etc.: cf. Kas. on P. IV. 2.116.
The fem. afix ई is applied when
the affix ठञ्ज is added to the word
काशि; cf. P. IV. 1.15.
काष्ठादि a class of words headed by
the word काष्ठ after which a word
standing as a second member in a
compound gets the grave accent
for it,e. g. काष्ठाध्यापकः, परमाध्यापकः etc.
cf. P. WIII. 1.67.
कि (I) krt affix इ prescribed after बु
roots with a prefix attached;e.g.प्रदि:
प्रधः cf. P.III.3.92, 93; (2) krt affix इ
looked upon as a perfect termina-
tion and, hence, causing reduplica-
tion and accusative case of the
noun connected, found in Wedic

**
114
कु
Literatureadded to roots ending in
अा, the root ऋ, and the roots गम्,
हृन् and जन;e.g. पपिः सोमं, जगुरिः, जग्मि:
etc., cf. P. III. 2.171: (2) a term
used in the Jainendra Vyakaraha
for thc term संबुद्वि.
किंवृत्त a form derived from thc pro-
noun किम्: cf. क्रिमो वृत्तं किंवृत्तम् | किंवृत्त-
ग्रहृणेन तद्विभक्त्यन्तं प्रतीयाङ्कतरडतमौ च	Ks. ]
on P. VIII 1.48.
mute कू cause the Vrddhi substi-
tute for the first vowel in the word
to which they are added.
कित्करण marking with the mute letter
क्, or looking upon as marked
with mute .क् for purposes men-
tioned above; ( sec कित् above ).
The word is often used in the
Mahabhsya: see M.Bh. on I. 1.
3, 5, 46; I. 2. 5, etc.
र्किद्युलकादि a class of words headed | किन krt affix इ prescribed along with
किव (l) marked with the mute letter
. The affixes of the first type are for|
by the word किंइछळक, which get their |
final vowel lengthened when the |
word गिरि is placed after them as
a second member of a compound,
provided the word so formed is ]
used as a proper noun : e. g. किंजुल-
कागिरि:, अञ्जनागिरिः; cf. Kत्रs. on P.
VI. 3.117.
क् which is applied by Panini to
affixes, for preventing guna and
vrddhi substitutes to the pre-
ceding इक् vowel (इ, उ, ऋ orल):
cf.विडति च, Pan. I.1.5; (2) con-
sidered or looked upon as marked
with mute indicatory क् for pre-
venting guna; cf. असंयोगाल्लिट् कित्
and the following P. I. 2.5 etc.
instance वत, क्त्वा, वितन् and others. ]
The affixes of the second type are
given mainly in the second pda of|
the first Adhyaya by Pव्रnihi. Be-
sides the prevention of guna and |
wrddhi, affixes marked with कु or
affixes called क्रित्, cause Safinprasa-
raja (see P. VT. 1.15,16), Glision
of the penultimate न् (P. VI.4.24),
clision of the penultimate vow6
(P. VI. 4.98,100), lengthening of
the vowel (VI. 4.15), substitution
ofऊ (VI. 4.19.21), elision of the
final nasal (VI. 4.37), substitution
of अI (VI.4.42). The taddhita
affixes which are marked with -
कि
क्रि. See क्रि above. The affix किन्
causes the acute acccnt on the
first vowel of the word ending
with it, while the affix ki ( इ ) has
itself the acute accent on its
vowel इ.
रादि a class of roots headed by the
root क्र, viz. the five roots दृ, ', दृ,
घ and प्रच् after which the desidera-
tive sign, i.e. the affix सन्, gets the
augment इ ( इट् ); e. g. चिकरिषति,
पिप्रच्छिषति: cf. K. on P.VII.2.75.
किइारादि, किस्सरादि a class of words
headed by किसर meaning some kind
of scent, which get thc taddhita
affix इक ( टन् ) applied to them
when thc word so formcd mcams
* a dealer of that thing; * c. g.
क्रिदारिकः, क्रिशारको: cf; Kas. on P.
IV. 4. 53.
कीट्हर्न Kielhorn F., a sound scholar
ofSanskrit Grammar who brought
out excellent editions of the Patanj-
ada Mahabhsya and the Paribhs-
endusekhara and wrote an essay
on the Varttikas of Ktyayana. For
details see Patafijala Mahabhasya
Vol VII.p.40, D. E society edition,
Poona.
इ (l) guttural class of consonants,
ie the consonants क्, न, ग्, घ , ङ्क.
The vowel उ addcd to क्, signifies
the class of क्. e. g. चजेीः कु घिण्यतेा,
VII. 3. 52, कुहेीश्रु: VII. 4.62, चोः कुः

कुक्
115
कुमुदाद्वि
VIII.2.30, किन्प्रत्ययस्य कु::VIII.2.62;
cf. अणुदित्सवर्णस्य चाप्रत्ययः P.I.1. 69; (2)
substitute कु for क्रिम् cf. P. WII. 2.
104.
कुक् augment क् ( 1 ) added to ई.3t
the end of a word before a sibi-
lant letter: e. g प्राङ्क्त: cf. P.VIII.
3. 28; ( 2 ) added to the words वात
and अतीसार before the affix इन्, cf
P. V. 2. 129: ( 3 ) added to words ]
of the नड group before the tad.
affix छ ( ईय), e.g. नइकीयम्, ऋक्षकोयम:
cf. P. IV. 2. 91.
कुङ्कुमविकाज्ञा a commentary by Siva-
Bhata on Jinendrabuddhis Ksi-
kvivaranapafijik which is known
popularly as Nyasa.
कुञ्चिक ( 1 ) a commentary on
NageSa's Laghimafija by Krsha-
mis'ra; ( 2 ) a commentary on
NageSa's Paribhsendusekhara by
Durbalacarya.
कुञ्जद्ि a class of words headed by कुञ्ज
to whtch the taddhita affix अायनं
(्) is applied in the sense ofगोत्र
i. e. grandchildren etc e. g. कौञ्जा-
ः: cf. Kई, on P. IV. 1. 9 '.
कुटाद्ि a group of roots headed by the
T root कुट्oftheVIth conjugation after
which an affix which is neither ञ्जित्
nor णित् becomes डित्,and as a result
prevents the substitution of गुण or
वृद्धिं [or the preceding vowel e. g.
कुटिता, कुटितुम्cf. गाङ्कुटादिभ्योञ्णिन्डित्
I. 2. 1.
कुटादिपाद् name given by Sradeva
and later grammarians to the sec-
ond pada of the first adhyaya of
Pagirii's Astdhyay, a3 the pada
begins with the Sप्tra गाङ्कुटादिभ्ी
ठिणान्डत् P. I. 2. 1.
__
कुटारच् tad. affix कुटार् added to अव,
e.g, अवकुटीरम्: cf P. V. 2. 30.
कुणप् tad. affix कुण added to words
*of पोळ group in the sense of Tripen-
ed condition';e.g.पीलुकुण:=पीतूनां पाक:
cf. P.V.2.24.
कुण|ेवाडच name of an ancient gran-
marian who lived possibly after
Ppini and before Patafjali and
who is referred to in the Mahई-
bhasya as giving an alternative
forms for the standard form of cer-
tain words; cf. कुणरवाडवरूवा नैषां दंकृरा
इ¶ M.Bh. onIII. 2.14; cf also
कुणखाडवरूबाह्य नैष वृहृीनरः कस्तर्हि ' विर्दीनर
ब: M. Bh. on VII.3.1.
कुणि name of an ancient Wttkar %n
the Sitras of Panini, mentioned in
their works by Kaiyata and Hara*
datta; cf. Kaiyaga's Pradipa on "
I.1.74, also Padamanjari on 1-1-1
कुत्व substitution of the consonants of
the कृ class or guttural consonants
कुप्पुइाखन् a famous grammarian of
e cighteenth century who wr918
some works on grammar of which
the परिभाषाभास्कर is an independent
treatise on Paribhaas.
कुमत् a word containing a gur!
1efter in it;.cf. कुसति व P. VIII. 4.
13.
कुमार (1) Kartikeya who is believed
to havegiven inspiration to theSat-
antra-strakra to write the Katan-
tra-stras; (2) named Visnumitra
, who wrote a commentary on the
ऋक्प्रातिशाख्य,
कुमारीस्तनयुगाछत्रि a phrase used in
the gloss on theकातन्त्र by Pug*
ghha to give along with the dg-
¶ of र्विसर्जनीय or विसर्ग a graphic
description of it as shown in scriPt
cf Kat, I.1.16 com. <-*
कुमुदादि a class of words (!) consisting
ofकुमुद, इक्रा, न्यग्रोध etc. to which the
adhita affix ठक् is applied in the
्enses given in PIV.2.67-9;
e.gकुमुदिकम्,इर्करिकम् etc(2) consist-
if3f कुमुद गोमय, रथकारंetc to which

कुम्भपद्यादि
116
छत
the taddhita affix इक ( ठक् ) is | कृञ् (l) root क् in the general sense
applied in the senses referred to
in (I): e.g. कौमुदिक्रम् , राथकारकम् etc.;
cf Kas, on P.IV.2.80.
कुम्भपद्यादि a class of words headed
by कुम्भपदी in which the word पाद
at the end of the compound is
changed into पाद् and further chan-
ged into पद् before the feminine
affix ई: e.g. कुम्भपदी, शतपदी, दुपदी,
पञ्चपदी etc.; cf Kव्रS. on P. V.4. 138,
139.
कुरच् krt. affix उर applied to the roots
विद्, भिद् and छिद्: e.g. विदुर:	भिदुरम् !
छिदुरम्	cf. Kas.on P.III.2.162.
कुर्वत् a term found in the Brahmaha
works and used by ancient gram-
marians for the present tcnse'.
कुर्वद्प effective or efficient, as oppo-
sed to dormant, as applied toनिमित्त
(cause); cf.निमित्तदाब्देयमस्ति येोग्यतामात्र !
कुसुल्थष्वपि बीजेषु वक्तारो भव त अङ्कुरान-
मित्तान्येतानीति अस्ति च कुर्वद्रूपे	Pada-
mafijar on P.VII.2.36.
कुर्वदि a class of words headed by the
word कुरु to which the taddhita
affix य ( ण्य ) is added in the sense
ofअपत्य or descendant: e.g. कीरव्यः
गाग्र्य etc.; cf. Kas, on P.IV.1.51.
ऊर्विणी a kind of svarabhakti: see
कर्विणी.
कुलालादि a class of words headed by
the word कुलाल to which the tadd-
hita affix अक्र ( बुञ्ज) is applied in
the sense of "made by', provided
the word so formed is used as a
Proper noun; e g.कौलालकम् , चारुडकम्:
cf. K8. om P.IV.3.118.
कुव्यवाय intervention by a letter of
the guttural class;cf. कुव्यवाये हृदेशेषु
प्रतिषेधे वृत्युः प्रयेोजनं वृत्रघ्न:, ' हु्नः
प्राघानीति, P.VIII.4.2 Vart.4,5.
कुरालं name of a grammarian who
wrote a commentary on the Kata-
ntra Vyakarana; see कातन्त्रपञ्जिक्रा.
Bf activity; (2) pratyahira or short
form for the three roots कृ, भ् and
अस्, cf. कृञ् चानुप्रयुज्यते लिटि P.II.1.40.
छत् lit, activity; a term used in the
grammars of Panini and others for
affixes applicd to roots to form
verbal derivatives; cf. कृदतिङ्क | धाते:
( ३ % % ) इत्यधिकारे तिङ्कवार्जतः प्रेत्ययः कृत्
स्यात् / Kas. on III.1.93, The krt
affixes are given exhaustively by
Prini in Sitras III.1.91 to III.4.
I17. क्त् and तद्धित appear to be the
ancient Pre-Paninian tcrms used
in the Nirukta and the Pratisakhya
works in the respcctive senses of
root-born and noun-born words
( इदन्त and तद्धितान्त according to
Painini's terminology), and not in
the sense of mere affixes; cf.
सन्त्यल्पप्रयेोगा: कृतेप्येकपदिकाः Nir. I.14:
अथापि भाधिकेभ्यो धातुभ्ये नैगमाः कृते भाष्यन्ते
Nir. II.2; तिङ्कृत्तद्धितसमासा: इाब्दमयम्
V.Pr. I.27; also cf. V.Pr. VI.4.
Patafijali and later grammarians
have uscd the word कृत् in the sense
of कृदन्त: cf. गतिकारकेापपदानां कृद्भिः सहृ
समासवचनं प्राक् सुबुत्पत:PariSck.Pari.75.
The krt affixes are given by Panini
in the senses of the different Kira-
kas अपादान, संप्रदान, करण, अाधकरण, कर्म
and क, stating in general terms
that if no other sense is assigned to
a krt affix it should be understood
that कत or the agent of the verbal
activity is the sense; cf. कर्तरि कृत् !
यष्वथेनिर्दळी नास्ति तत्रेदमुपतिष्ठत Ks. _ on
III.4.67. The activity element
possessed by the root lies generally
dormant in the verbal dcrivative
nouns; cf. कृदभिहितो भावो द्रव्यवद्भवति,
क्रियावदपि । M.Bh.on V.4.19 and VI,
2.139.
ट् CID a term used by ancient
grammarians in the sense of *past
tense';(2)effected, done. The word

कृताकृतप्रसाङ्ग
117
कृद्ाभहित
is mostly used in this sense in
grammar.works;e.g. कंतन कृतं स्यात् ;
नानुबन्धकृतमनेकाल्त्वम् Par. Sek.Pari. 6.
छत्रुतमसङ्गि a definition of the tern
नित्य in the sense of a rule which
occurs after certain another rule
is aPPlied as well as before
that rule is applied: cf. कृताकृतप्रसङ्गि
नित्यम् | तद्विपरीतमनित्यम्	Pari, S8
Pari. 42: cf also कंथं पुनरयं नित्यः |
कूपत्वात् l M. Bh. on VI.
. 62. _
ऋतादेि a classof wordssuch as कृत, मित,
*त, भृत, उक् and others with whicH
the words श्राणे, एक, पूर, कुण्ड, राइ
ad 9thers are compoindडेd, pro-
vided both the w6rds forming
the compourd are in the sam
case;.9-g: श्रेणिकृता:, एककृताः, कुण्डभूता:
etc. cf Kas. on P. II. 1.56.
छतार्थ lit which has got its purpose
Served: a term used in connection
with a rule that has been possible
to be applied (without clash with
another rule) in the case of cer-
tain instances, although it comes
into conflict in the case of other
istances cf तत्र कृतार्थत्वाद् दिकइादै
प्रेण ठञ्जतौ स्याताम् Ks.6a P. V
?. 9. The word चरितार्थे is used
almost in the same sense. _
घटत्य् lit. that which should be done
the word कृत्य is used as a tech
मnical term in grammar in the
sense of krt affixes which possess
the sense * should be done.
Panini has not defined the term
इत्यbut hehas introduced a topic
( अधिकार ) by the name कृत्य (P.
III. 1.95), and mentioned krt
afixes therein which are to be
called कृत्य right on upto the men-
tion of the affix ण्बुळ. in P. III.
1, 133; cf. कृत्याः प्राङ्क ण्बुल: P. III.
4.99 The k्tya affixes, common-
ly found in use, are त्य, अनीय and
य ( यत्, क्यप् and ण्यत् ).
ऋत्रिम artificial; technical, as opposed
to derivative. Im grammar, the
term कृत्रिम means *technical sense', -?
as contrasted with अकृत्रिम * ordi-
nary sense : cf. कृत्रिमाकृत्रिमयेोः कृत्रिमे
कार्यसंप्रत्यय: Par. Sek. Pari. 9.
कृत्रिमाकृत्रिमपरिभाषा a term popular-
ly used by grammarians for the
परिभाषा or maxim that out of the
two senses, the technical and the
derived ones, the technical sense
should be preferred; in rare cases,
the other too, is preferred cf.
Pari. Sek. Pari.9.
कृत्वसुच् tad. affix वृत्वम् applied to
numerals to convgy the sense of
repetition, e. g. पंञ्चकृत्व: द्क्त्व: cf.
संख्यायाः क्रियाभ्यावृत्तिगणने कृत्वसुच् P. V.
4.17.
छत्वे form of the tad. affix कुत्वम् in
Vedic Literature. See कृत्वसुच्,
छत्स्वर the same as कृदुत्तरपदप्रकृतिस्वर्, the
retention of its accent by the
second member of a tatpurusa
compound, if the first member is a
word termed Gati or Karaka, by
the rule गतिकारकोपपदात् कृत् P.VI.2.
139; cf. अब्ययस्वरस्य कृत्स्वरः M.Bh. on
VI.2.52; cf.विभक्तीषत्स्वरात्कृत्स्वरः M.Bh.
WI.2.52 Wart, 6.
कुद्न्त the word ending with a krt
affix; the term कृत् is found used in
the sutras of Panini for कृदन्त: cf.
कृत्तद्धितसमासाश्च P. I.2.46. The term
कुदन्त for root-nouns, or nouns deri-
ved from roots, is found in the
Atharvapratisakhya (I.1.10, II.3.8,
II1.2.4), the Mahabhasya and all
the later works on grammar. See
the word क्त्.
छद्भिहित expressed by a krt affix:cf.
कृदभिहितो भावो द्रव्यवद्भवति M.Bh. on P.
II.2.19, III.1.67, IV.13, VI.2.139,

क्रद्ग्रहण
छद्ग्रहृण mention of a krt i.c. of a
word ending with a k!t affix. The
word mainly occurs in the Pari-
bh∂ कृद्ग्रहणे गतिकारकपूर्वस्यापि ग्रहणम्
which occurs first as an expression
of the Varttikakra (P.I.4.13 Vrt.
9) and has been later on given as
a Paribhasa by later grammarians
(Pari. Sek. Pafi.28).The Paribhङ्क
. is referred to as वृद्ब्रह्मणपरिभाषा in later
grammar works especially comme-
ntary works.
कृद्ग्रहणपरिभाषा a short term used
by the grammarians for the maxim
कृद्ग्रहणे गतिकारकपूर्वस्यापि ग्रहुणम्. Par.Se.
Pari. 28. See ङ्कद्ग्रहृण.
्
ऋदृढाते a short treatise by a gramma-
rian named मोक्षेश्वर who lived in the
fifteenth century. The work deals
. with verbal dcrivatives.
टल्ड् the elision of a krt affix: the
' word is found used along with the
words प्रकृतिप्रत्यापत्तिः, and प्रकृतिवत् कारकं
भवते in the Varttika अाख्यानात्कृतस्त-
· दाचष्ट इतेि इल्लुक् प्रकृतिप्रत्यापत्तिः प्रकृतेर्वच
～ कारकम् by means of which the
phrase कंसं घातयति is formed for the
Sentence कंसव्धमन्व!.
छळीप the dropping or removal of the
verbal noun(क्दन्त)after the words ग्र,
पर्[ etc when they are compound-
* 9d with the following noun: e.g.
the dropping of गतं from the
expression निर्गतः कौशाम्ब्याः when it
is compounded into निष्क्रोद्भाविः &fः
, क्लेपे निष्कौशाम्बिः, निर्वाराणास: M.B.8
P.I.4.l. Vart. 18.
छशाश्वादि a class of words headed
' by the word कृशाश्व to which the
, taddhita affix ईय ( छए ) is applied
( in the four senses given in P.fV.2.
- 97-70, 9.8. कार्कीश्वीयः, आर्यः: cf.
Ka, on P.IV.2.80. .
टध also कुट the foremost of the seven
, Yajas: .cf कुष्ट्प्रथमृद्वितीयतृतीयचतुर्थ-
.,.मन्द्राति स्वायां: Tai.Pr..xxIIi.14.
118 केन्
कृष्णर्किकरप्राक्रिया an alternative name
for the wcll-known grammar-work
क्रियाकौमुदी written by Rāmacandra
SeSa. See प्रक्रियाकौमुदीं. -
ऋणपण्डित called also इधेकृष्ण, a sho-
lar of Sanskrit Vyakarana who
wrote गृढभावविवृत,a commentary on
the Prakriy्-Kaumud of Rºma-
candra SeSa.
क्षणमित्र a scholar of grammar and
nyya of the 17th century A.D.
who wrote many commentary
works some of which are (l) a
commentary called Ratnarpava on
the Siddhānta- Kaumud, (2) a
99mmentary named Kalpalata on
Bhatoji's Praudhamanoram, (3)
a c9amentary named Bhvadipa
on Bhattoji's Sabdakaustubha, (4)
3 commentary on Nagojibhaga's
Laghumafiji by name Kuni!
and (5) a commentary on Vaiya-
karanabhisana.
क्रुष्णमिश्र an alternative name of कृष्ण-
मित्र. See कृष्णमित्र.
कृष्णमीनिन् Son of Govardhana and
Surnamed Maunf, who wrote a
commentary named सुबोधिनी on the
SiddhāntaKaumudi at the end of
the 17th century A.D.
छष्णलीलाशुकमुनि author of a commen-
tary named Purusakra on Bhojas
Saraswatikanthabharana.
क्रुष्णरााखिन् ( आरडे ) a famous gram-
marian and logician of the 18th
century who wrote Akhytaviveka
and Krakavida. See अारोड.
कृष्णशेष a famous grammarian of the
Scsa family who wrote a commen-
tary named the Gudhabhvavivrti
on the Prakriya Kaumud ofRrna-
candra Sesa.See कृष्णपाडितं,
केन् kt. affix ए in the sense of कृत्य
(Potpass.part.) found in Vedic

केन्य _
_K
119 काण्डभइ
Literature; e.g. नावगाहे = नावगााईतव्यम्
cf. KaS. on P.III.4.14.
केन्य krt. affix एन्य in the sense of इचितं
in Vedic Literature: e.g. दिदृक्षेण्य: !
, शुश्रूषेण्यः: cf K. on P.III.4.14.
केलिमर् krt, affix एळिम in the sense
of कृत्य: e. g. पचेलिमा माषाः: cf. काळमर
" उपसंख्यानम् P. III. I. 96 Virt.
केवळ i ed;a term applied to a letter
or a word when it is not combined
' with another letter or another
word in a compound; cf. धर्मादनिच्चु
केवलात् | केवलान्न पदसमुदायात् Ks on
* P. V. 4.I24; (2) simple (word)
' without an affix added: cf. अर्थवत्ता
' नोपपद्यते केवलेन अवचनात् | P. I. 2.45
Vart. 7, also कृत्तद्धितान्तं चैवार्थवत् | न
क्रव्ला: कृतस्तद्धिता बा M.Bh.on P.I.4.14.
केदाच writer of a commentary named
प्रक्राळा on the Siks of Panini. He
' lived in the 17th century.
केइावद्क्त writer of the commentary
, named दुर्धटद्धाट on the grammar
' संक्षिप्तसार written by Goyicandra,
कै krt affix ए used in Vedic Litera-
, ture as noticed in the forms प्रयै
रोहृिष्यै and अव्यथिष्यै: cf. P. III.4.10.
केमर्थक्य iit. position of guestioning
the utility ; absence of any appa-
rent utility: cf. कैमर्थक्यालियमी भवति
विधेये नास्तीति कृत्वा M. Bh. on I.
4.3, III. 1.46; III. 2.127, III.
* 3.19; VI. 4.49, VII. 2.26, and
: VIII. 4.32.
कैयट name of the renowned com-
mentator on the Mahabhasya,
who lived in the 11th century.
He was a resident of Kashmir
, and his father's name was Jaiyata.
The commentary on the Mah-
bhagya was named मह्याभाष्यप्रदीप by
him, which is believed by later
grammarians to have really acted
as प्रदीप or light, as without .it,
the Mahabhgya of Patafiali
o<1<+
=__
would have remained unlit, that
is unintelligible, at several places.
Later grammarians attached to
प्रदीप almost the same importance
as they did to the Mahabhasya
and the expression तदुक्तं भाव-
कैयटये: has been often used by com-
mentators. Many commentary
works were written on the Pradipa
out of which Nagesas Uddyota
is the most popular. The word
कैयट came to be used for the word
मह्यभ्ष्यप्रदीप which was the work of
Kaiyata.For details see Vyakarana
Mahbhsya published by the D.
E. Society, Poona, Vol. VII. pp.
389-390. _
कैयटप्रकाशा a commentary on the
Mahbhasyapradipa of Kaiyata
written by Nilakatha of the Dra-
vida country. Nilakantha lived in .
the 17th century and wrote works
on various subjects.
कैयटप्रकाशका a commentary on the
MahabhSyapradipa of Kaiyata
written by Pravartakopadhyya.
कैयटविवरण (1) a commentary on the
Mahabhasyapradipa of Kaiyata
written by Isvarananda, in the
16th century; (2) a commentary
on Kaiyata's Pradipa by Rama-
candra-Saraswati, who lived in the
16th century.
कीटरादि a class of words headed by
the word क्रीटर which get their final
vowel lengthened when the word
वन is placed after them as a second.
member of a compound, provided
the word so formed is used as
a proper noun; e.g. कीटर्ावणम् .
मिश्रकेावर्णम्. cf. Rs. on P, VI. 3,117.
क्रीण्डभइ a reputed grammarian who
wrote an extensive explanatory
gloss by nameVaiyakaranabhisana
6n the Vaiyakaranasiddhantak-
rik of Bhagoj Diksita. Another

केोदण्डराम
120
__
[क्तच्
work Vaiyikaranabhisahasra.
which is in a way an abridgment
of the Bhisana, was also written
by him. Kondabhatta lived in
the beginning of the l7th century.
He was the son of Rafgoj and
nephew of Bhattoji Diksita. He
was one of the few writers on the
Arthavicव्रra in the VyakarathaSastra
and his Bhusanasara ranks next to
the Vakyapadya of Bhartphari.
Besides the Bhisama and Bhisana-
sara, Kondabhatta wrote two
independent works viz. Vaiyर्तka-
ranasiddhāntadipika and Sphota-
vada.
कंद्ण्डराम a scholar of Sanskrit Vy-
karana who composed दाव्दसिद्धान्त-
मञ्जरी a small treatise dealing with
the declension of nouns.
कौण्डिन्य an ancient grammarian
referred to in the Taittirya
Pratisakhya (T. Pr. V. 38) and
Panini's Agdhyay, (P.II.4.70). **
कौमार, कोमारवैयाकरण (1)an alternative ;
name of the Katantra Vyakaraha
given to it on the strength of the
traditional belief that the original
inspiration for writing it was
received by Sarvavarman from
Kumara or Kartikeya; (2) small
treatises bearing the name Kau-
miravyakarana written by Mumi-
puhgava and Bhavasena. The
latter has written Katantrarpa-
mala also.
SN -_ - _
कीदृलपुत्र an ancient grammarian
referred to in the Taittiriya Prati-
sakhya: cf. T.Pr. XVIII.2.
क्त krt affix त in various senses, call-
ed by the name fनष्ठा in Panini 's
grammar along with the affix
cf. क्तक्तवत् निष्ठा P.I.1.26.The various
senses in which क्त is prescribed
can be noticed below : (1) the
general sense of something done
in the past time as past pass.parti-
ciple e. g. कृत:, भुक्तम् etc.: cf P.
III. 2.102; (2) the sense of the
beginning of an activity when it is
used actively: e. g. प्रकृतः कटं देवदत्तः,
cf. P. III.2.102 Vart. 3; (3) the
sense of activity of the present
tense applied to roots marked
withe mute ， as also to roots in
the sense of desire, knowledge and
worship; e.g. मिलः, क्ष्विण्ण:, धृष्ट: as
also राज्ञां मतः, राज्ञामिष्टः, राज्ञां बुद्धः; cf.
P.III.2.187, 88; (4) the sense of
mere verbal activity ( भाव ) e. g.
हृसितम् , सहितम् , जल्पितम् , (used always
in the neuter gender); cf. P.III.3.
114: (5) the sense of benediction
when the word ending in क्त is
used as a technical term, e.gदवदत्त:
in the senseदवा एनं दयासुः. The krt
affix क्तिन् is also used similarly
e.g. सातिः भूतिः मन्ति:; cf Kas. on P.
III.3.174.
{ क्तवतु kpt affix तवत् which also is call-
ed निष्ठा. It is prcscribed in the
active sense of somebody who has
done a thing sometime in the past.
A word ending in it is equivalent
to the past active participle; e.g.
भुक्तवान् ब्राह्मणः: cf P.I.1.26. The fem.
affix डीप् ( ई ) is added to nouns
ending in क्तवतु to form feminine
bases; cf. P. IV. 1.6.
क्तान्त a noun base ending in the krt
affix क्त; past passive participle;
cf. क्षप सप्तम्यन्तं क्तान्तन सहृ समस्यते |
अवततनकुलस्थितं त एतत् M. Bh.on II.2.
47.
क्तार्थं sense of क्त i.c. sense of the past
pass. participle; cf. उपसर्गाः क्तार्थ,
प्रादयः क्तार्थ ( समस्यन्ते ), P. II. 2. 18,
Vrt. 4.
क्तिच् krt affix ति added to roots in
the benedictive sensc to form संज्ञादाब्द
or nouns in a technical sense; c.g-
तन्ति: in the sense of तनुतात्: cf. Kas.

_
[क्तन् 12
' on III.3.174. क्त is also added in
the same way. See क्त.
क्रितन krt affix ति added to roots to
form nouns in the sense of verb-|
action; e.g. कृति:, थिति:, मति: etc.;cf.
P.III.3.94-97.
ऋित्र krt affix त्रि added to the roots
markcd with the syllable ड by Pan-
in in his Dhatupatha: after this
affix त्रि, the tad. affix म ( मप् ) in
the sense of निवृत्तम् (accomplished)
is necessarily added, e. g. पक्त्रिमम्,
कृत्रिमम्: cf. P. III. 3.88. and P. IV.
4.20.
क्त्वा krt. affix त्वा added to roots (1) in
the sense of prohibition conveyed
by the word अलं or खळ preceding
the root, e.g. अले वृत्वा, खख् कृत्वा: cf
P. III. 4.18; (2) in the sense of
exchange in the case of the root मा, |
e. g. अपामेत्य याचतेः; cf. P. III. 4. 19;
() to show an activity of the past
time along with a verb or noun
of action showing comparatively
a later time, provided the agent
of the former and the latter activi-
ties is the same:e.g. भुक्त्वा व्रजति, स्नात्वा
पीत्वा भुक्त्वा व्रजति: cf. P. III. 4. 21.
This krt affix is always added to |
roots when they are without any
prefix: when there is a prefix the ;
indeclinable, ending inत्वा, is always ]
compounded with the prefix and |
त्वाis changed into य (ल्यम्),e.g. प्रकृत्य,
प्रहृत्य: cf. समासेनञ्पूर्वे क्त्वो ल्यप् P. VII.
1.37. The substitution of य is at
will in Wedic Literature; e.g. कृष्णं
वासो यजमानं परिधापयित्वा ( instead of
परिधाप्य ), cf. P. VII. 1.38, while
sometimes, य is added after स्वां
as an augment e. g. दत्वाय सविता
धिय: cf. P. VII. l. 47, as also
sometimes ल्वी or त्वोनम् is substi-
tuted for त्वा e. g. इष्ट्वीनं देवान् , स्नात्वी
मलादव, cf. P. VII. 1.48, 49.
1 क्यप्र
of a verbal root which does not
leave its verbal nature on the one
hand although it takes the form of
a substantive on the other hand.
ठ krt affix नु added to the roots त्रस्,
|्ध्, धृष् and क्षिप् in the sense of
habituated etc. as given in the rule
आकरतच्छीलतद्धर्मतत्साधुकारिषु P.III.2.134;
e.g, त्रस्नुः, गृध्नु: etc. cf. P. III. 2.140.
क्मरच krt affix मर added in the sense
of habituated etc. to the roots ख,
घम् and अद्: e. g. सृमरः, घस्मर:, अद्मर:
cf. P.III. 2.134 and 160.
|क्य common term for the Vikaranas
क्यञ्च् , क्यङ् and क्यब् : cf. न: क्य P. I.
4.15, also cf. P. III. 2.170, VI. '
L4. 50.
क्यङ् affix य taking Atmanepada termi
nations after it, added in the sense
ofsimilar behaviour to a substan-
tive. The substantive to which
this affix य is added, becomes a
denominative root: e. g. काक्र: |्येना-
यतै, कुमुदे पुष्करायते, cf Kas. on P. III.
1.11-12, also on P. III, 1.14-18.
क्यच् denominative affix ( विकरण ) in
the sense of desiring for oneself,
added to nouns to form denomi-
tive roots; e.g. पुत्रीयतिः क्यच् is also
added to nouns that are upama-
nas or standards of comparison in
the sense of (similar) behaviour:
e.g. पुत्रीयति च्छत्रम्: cf. Kas. on P.
III.1.8, 10. It is also added in the
sense of * doing ' to the words
नमस्, वरिवस् and fचत्र :e. g. नमस्यति
दवनं, वरिवस्यति गुरून् , चित्रीयत: cf. Kas.
on P. III. 1.19.
क्यप् krt afix य applied to the roots
व्रज् and यज् in the sense of " verbal
activity ' and to the roots अजू
with सम्, षद् with नि etc. to form
proper nouns e. g. नज्या, इज्यां,
समज्या,निबद्या etc.,cf. P. III. 3.98 and
99; (2) krtya affix य in the sense
_
क्त्वान्त gerund: a mid-way derivative
16
of should be done' applied to the

यष्
*N
roots वद्, भू and हृन् (when preceded
by certain words put as upapada),
as also to roots with penultimate
ऋ and the roots मृज्, इ, स्तु and
others: e. g. ब्रह्मोद्यम् , ब्रह्मभूयम् , इत्वम् ,
स्तुत्यम् ete. cf KS. on P. III. 1.
106,121.
क्यष् affix य added to certain nouns
like लेहिंत and others to form
denominative r00ts after which
terminations of both the padas
are placed e. g. लेहितायति, लेोहृितायते:
cf Ka8. om P. III. 1.13.
क्यु, क्युन् Undi affixes अन.
क्रत्वादि a class of words headed by
the word क्रतु, which have their first
vowel accented acute in a Bahu-
vrihi dompound, provided the first
member of the compound is the
word सु: e.g. सुक्रतुः, सुप्रपूर्ति: etc.: cf.
K8. on P. VI.2.118.
क्रम (l) serial order or succession
as contrasted with यौगपद्य or simul-
taneity.The difference between क्रम
and यौगपद्य is given by भरि in the
line क्रमं विभिद्यते रूपं यौगपद्ये न भिद्यते
Wik. Pad. II. 470. In order to
form a word by the application of
several rules of grammar, a parti-
cular order is generally followed in
accordance with the general prin-
ciple laid down in the Paribhis
पूर्वपरनित्यान्तरङ्गापवादानामुत्तरोत्तरं बलीयः, as
also according to what is stated
in the sitras असिद्धवदत्राभात्, पूर्वत्रासिद्धम्
etc. (2) succession, or being
placed after specifically with re-
ference to indeclinables like एव,
च etc. which are placed after
a noun with which they are
connected. When an indc-
cinable is not so connected,
it is called भिन्नक्रम: cf. परिपन्थे ，
तिष्ठति (P. IV. 4.36), चकारो भिन्नक्रमः
प्रत्ययार्थं समुच्चिनोति, K8. on P. IV.
4.36; also ईडजनोर्वे च	चशब्दो भिन्नक्रमः
122
क्रमपाठ
श: (VII. 2.77) अनुकर्षणार्थं विज्ञायते
Kas.on P.IV.2.78; (3) succession of
the same consonant brought
about; doubling: reduplication;
क्रम is used in this way in the Rk
Pratisakhya as a synonym of
dvitva prescribed by Panini: e. g.
अा त्वा रथं becomes अा त्वा रथम् ;
संोमानं स्वरणम् becomes सोमानं स्वरणम्
cf. स्वरानुस्वारोपढितो द्विरुच्यत संयोगादि: स
ऋमोSधिक्रभ सन्	etc, R. Pr. VI. l
to 4: cf. also स एष द्विर्भावरूपे विधि:
क्रमसंज्ञो वेदितव्यः Uvvata on R. Pr.
VI. 1. The root क्रम् IA. is
several times used in the Prati-
Sakhya works for द्विभेवन, cf also T.
Pr.XXI.5; XXIV. 5; (4) repetition
of a word in the recital of Vedic
passages, the recital by such a
repetition being called क्रमपाठ,
which is learnt and taught with a
view to understanding the original
forms of words combined in the
Sarhhit by euphonic rules,
substitution of letters such as that
of ण् for न् , or of ＾ for √ , as
also the separate words of a com-
pound word ( सामासिक्रदच्द् ); e. g.
पर्जन्याय प्र	प्र गायत | गायत दिवः | दिव-
स्पुत्राय | पुत्राय मीळ्हुषे | मीळ्हुष इति
र्माव्हुषे	cf क्रमे द्वाभ्यामतिक्रम्य् प्रत्यादायो-
न्तरं तंयेो: उत्तेरणेपसंदध्यात् तथाद्धर्वे समापयेत् |
R. Pr. X. 1. For details and
special features, cf. R. Pr. ch. K
and XI: cf. also V. Pr. IV. 182-
190: T. Pr, XXIII. 20, XXIV. 6.
क्रमण doubling. Irregular doubling is
looked upon as a fault: cf. क्रमणे
वा अयथेाक्तम् R. Pr. XIV. 25.
क्रमदीश्वर author of a grammar named
संक्षिप्तंसार who lived at the end
of the 13 th century.
क्रमपाठ recital of the Vedic Sarhhita
by means ofseparate groups of two
words, repcating each word ex-
cept the first of the Vedic verse-
line; see क्रम above. The various

क्रमादि
123
क्रियावचन'
rules and exceptions are given in
detail in Pagalas ten and eleven
of the Rk PratiSikhya. The
Vedic Sarhhit or Sarhhitapatha
is supposed to be the original one
and the Padaptha prepared later
. on, with a view to preserving the
Vedic text without any change
. or modification of a letter, or
accent; cf. न लक्षणेन पदकारा अनुवत्र्याः !
, पदकारैन्म लक्षणमनुवत्र्यम् M. Bh. on
III. 1.109, VI. 1.207 and VIII.
2.16, where Patafijali clearly says
that grammar- rules are not to
follow the Padapatha, but, the
writer of the Padapagha is to
' follow the rules already laid down.
The Japtha, the Ghanapatha
' and the other recitals are later
developments of the Padapgha as
' they are not mentioned in the
Pratisakhya works.
क्रमाद्वि a class of words headed by
the word क्रम to which the tad-
dhita affix अक्र (बुञ् ) is added in
* the sense of fone who studies and
understands'; e. g. क्रमक:, पदक:,
* मीमांसकः, इक्षक्र: etc. cf. KS. on
' IV. 2.61.
क्रस्य a consonant which is subjected
to doubling cf. क्रम्ये वर्णः पूर्वमक्षरं:
' भजते R. Pr. XVIII. 18.
क्रिया action, verbal activity: cf. क्रिया-
वचनो धातु: M. Bh. on I. 3.1 ; cf.
also क्रियावाचकमाख्यातम् R. Pr. XII.
8. quoted by Uvvata in his Bhasya
on W. Pr. WIII. 50; cf. also
उपसर्गाः क्रियायेंगे P. I. 4,59, लक्षणहेत्वेाः
क्रियाया: P. III. 2.126; cf. also यत्तर्हि
तदिङ्गितं चेष्टते निमिषितं स शब्द: ' नत्याहृ
. क्रिया नाम सा M. Bh. Ahnika 1.
. The word भाव many times is used
in the same sense as kriya or
. verbal activity in the sutras of
ः	Panini. cf. P.I.2.21 ; I.3.13; III. 1.
.. 66.etc;cf. also वृदभिहृिते भावो द्रव्यवद्भवति
a statement made frequently 'by
the Mahbhasyakara. Some scho-
lars draw a nice distinction bet-
ween क्रिया and भाव, क्रिया meaning
dynamic activity and भाव mean-
ing static activity: cf. अपरिस्पन्दन-
साधनसाध्ये धात्वर्थे भावः | सपरिस्पन्दन-
साधनसाध्यस्तु क्रिया Kaiyata's Pradipa
on M. Bh. III. 1.87. Philosophi-
, cally क्रिया is defined as सत्ता
appearing in temporal sequence
in various things. When सत्त does
not so appear it is called सल्ब.
क्रियाकलाप a grammatical. work on
the conjugation of roots written .
by Vijaynanda. _
क्रियागुप्तिक a grammar work quoted
by वर्धमान in his गणरत्नमहोदधि.
क्रियातिपत्ति Iit. over-extension or.
excess of action; the word is,
however, used in grammar in the
sense of non-happening of an
expected action especially when .
it forms a condition of the con-
ditional mood ( लुड् ); cf. कुताश्चे-
वैगुण्यादनभिनिवृत्तिः क्रियायाः क्रियातपात:
KS. on P. III. 3.139; cf. also
नान्तरेण साधनं क्रियायाः प्रवृत्तिरस्तीति साधना-
तेिपातैश्श्रेऋयातपातिरपि भवति M. Bh.
on III. 3.139. _
क्रियाफळ intended fruit of a verbal
activity: cf. स्वरितञ्जितः क्रत्रभिप्रायक्रियाफळ
P.I.3.72.
क्रियायोग association with a verbal
activity: cf उपसर्गाः क्रियायोगे P.I.4.59.
क्रियार्थे (adj. to क्रिया) lit. meant or in-
tended for another action e g.
भोक्तुं व्रजति where गमनक्रिया is.intend-
ed for भजनक्रिया: cf. तुमुन्ण्वुलौ क्रियायां
क्रियार्थायाम् P.III.3. 10. .:
क्रियावचन meaning or expressing a
verbal activity; a term generally
' applied to dhatus or roots,or even to
verbs. The term is also applied to
denominative , affixes like क्यज्ञ
which produce a sort of verbal.

क्रियाविशेषण 124
किन्
activity in the noun to which they
are added: cf. क्रियावचनाः क्यजादय:
M.Bh. om III.1.19.
क्रियाविशेषण determinant or modifier
of a verbal activity; cf. क्रियाक्षि्णं
चेति वक्तव्यम् सुट् पचति दुषु पचतिM.Bh.on
II.1.1;nouns used as KriyvisesaPa
are put in the neuter gender, and
in the nom. or the acc. case in the
sing. number: cf. क्रियाविशेषणानां कर्मस्वं
* नपुंसकलिङ्गता च Pari.Bhskara Pari.56.
क्रियासमभिहार repetition or intensity
of a verbal activity ; cf. समभिहृर:
पौनः पुन्यं भृशार्थे वा, Kas. on P.I.4.2.
kpt affix रु applied to the root भी,
e.g. भीरुः, cf. P.III.2.174.
कुकन् krt affix रुक: e.g, भीरुकः: cf.(भिय:)
कुक्रन्नपि वक्तव्यः P.III.2.174 Varttika
केयाद्रिक a root belonging to the
class of roots which are headed by
क्री and which are popularly known
as roots of the ninth conjugation;
cf. यथा तु वार्तिकं तथा कैयादिक्रस्याप्यत्र
प्रहृणमिष्यते Padamanjar on VII.2.48.
क्रीडादि a class of words headed by
the word क्रड to which the tadd-
hita affix य ( ब्यङ्ग ) is added in the
, sense of a female descendant; e.g.
क्रीडया, अपिढाल्या, गौकक्ष्या etc. ; cf. Ks.
on P.IV.1.80.
क्रोष्य an ancient school of gramma-
rians who are believed to have
' written rules or Warttikas on some
, rules of Panini to modify them;
, the क्रोष्ट्रीय school is quoted in the
. Mahabhasya; cf. परिभाषान्तरामेति च
मत्वा क्रौढीयाः पठन्ति | M. Bh. on P.
I.1,3.
क्रौड्यादि a class of words headed by
the word क्रीडि which do not take
the feminine affix ई when they
' stand at the end of a compound;
' e.g. कल्याणक्रीडा, सुभगा, पृथुजघना etc.;
cf. Kas. on P.IV.].56.
क्रयादिगण a class of roots headed by
the root क्री ( डुक्रीञ् ) to which the
comjugational sign न ( श्रीं ) is
added; roots of the ninth comjuga-
tion.
ीबत्व a word used in the sense of
*neuter gender' by grammarians
later than पतञ्जाले and the Wartti-
kakara; cf. समभागे क्रीबलिङ्गमर्धमैक्रदे-
द्वाना समस्यते Bh Vr. on P.II.2.2;
पक्षे हि फीबत्वम् Kaiyata's Pr. on II.1.
5l : समाहृारद्वन्द्व ढीबत्वप्रसङ्गात् Durgh.Vr.
on P.II.4.l 7.
क्डकन krt affix ढक्र added to the root
भी: e.g. भीढक, cf. P. III.2. 174.
कनिप् krt affix बन् in the sense of
agent added to (l) a root preced-
ed by an Upasarga or a Subanta
Upapada or sometimes even with-
out amy preceding word;e.g.प्रतरित्वा,
धीवा, पीवा ; (2) to the root दृट्, pre-
ceded by am Upapada which is the
object of the root दृढ, e.g. पारदृश्व:
(3) to roots युच् and कृ， having राजन्
as their object, e.g. राजयुध्वा, राजकृत्वा ;
cf. Panini III.2.94-96.
करप् krt affix वर, taking the affix ई
( डीप् ) in the feminine gender,
added to the roots इ, नट्, जि etc.;
इत्वरी, नश्वर:, जित्वरी, गत्वरी: cf. P.III.
2.163-164.
क्व उ krt affix व्, taking the fem.
affix ई (ङ्कीर्) in the feminine gender,
prescsibed in the sense of perfect
tense,which is mostly found in Vedic
Literature and added to some
roots only such as सद्, व्, श्रु etc.in
the spoken language : e. g, जक्षिवान्
पापवान् उपसेदिवान् कंत्सः पाणिनिम्: cf.Ks.
on P.III.2.107-109.
कि a common term to signify krt
affixes किन् and fके both; cf. P. III.
2.134, VI. 3.11 5, VI.4.40; VIII.3.
25, VI.4.15, VI.4.97.
किन् krt 2ero affix, i.e. an affix of
which every letter is dropped and
nothing remains, added to the roots

किम्
रुघ्, यजु, सृज्, दृढ , etc. under certain
conditions: e.g. घृतस्पृक्, ऋत्विक्, यादृढ,
तादृक्: cf. Ks. on P.III.2.58-60.
किप् ( 1) krt affix 2ero, added to the
roots सद् , सू, द्विष् and others with a
preceding word as upapada or
with a prefix or sometimes even
without any word, as also to the
＾ foot हुन् preceded by the words
ब्रह्मन् , भ्रूण and वृत्र, and to the root क्
preceded by सु, क्रर्मन् etc., and to the
roots सु, and चि under certain con-
' ditions e.g. उपसत्, सू:, प्रसूः, पर्णध्वत्,
ब्रह्महृ, वृत्रहृा, सीमसुत् , आस्रवित्: cf.P.III.
2.61, 76, 77, 87-92: 177-179: (2)
the denominative affix 2ero appli-
ed to any substantive in the sense
of behaviour अश्वति, गर्दभति etc.: cf.
M.Bh. and KaS, on P.III.1.11.
किबन्त a substantive ending with the
' krt affix किप् (zero affix) added to a
root to form a noun in the sense of
, the verbal action (भाव). The words
* ending with this affix having got
the sense of verbal activity in them
guite suppressed, get the noun )
terminations सु, औ, जस् etc. and
not ति, त: etc. placed after them;
cf. कृदभिात भावे द्रव्यबद् भवति. How-
' ever, at the same time, these
' words undergo certain operations
peculiar to roots simply because
the krt affix entirely disappears
and the word formed, appears
. like a root: cf. किबन्ता धातुत्वं न जहृति.
, KaiyaLa's Prad. on VII.1.70.
क a Jain grammarian guoted in
, the well-known stan2a धन्वन्तरि:
: क्षपणकमरसिंहृढाङ्ककुo which enumerates
the seven gems of the court of
, Vikramaditya, on the strength of
, which some scholars believe that
, he was a famous grammarian of
the first century B.C,
क्षमामाणिक्य a Jain grammarian who
, wrote a small grammar work
known as Ani:krikavivaraha
125
क्षुभ्ताद्व
क्षितीश्ाचन्द्र (चक्रबार्तन्) or K. C. CHAT-
TERII a scholar of Sanskrit
grammar who has written a work
on technical terms in Sanskrit, who
has edited several grammar works
and is at present editing the
Cndra Vyakarana and conduct-
ing the Sanskrit journal named
Mafijitsa at Calcutta.
क्षिप्र lit. rapid, accelerated, a short
name given in the a Pratisakhya
works to a Sarhdhi or euphonic
combination of the vowels इ, उ, ऋ,:
ल with a following dissimilar
vowel; cf Uvvata Bhasya on R.Pr.
III.10: cf. also इको यणवि P.VI.1.77.
The name Ksipra is given to this :
Sarhdhi possibly because the vowel,
short or long, which is turned into
a consonant by this sarhdhi be-
comes very short (i.e. shorter than
a short vowel i.e. a semi-vowel).
The word क्षेप्र is also used in this
sense referring to the Ksiprasarhdhi.
क्षीरतरङ्गिणी a kind of commentary
on the Dhatupatha of Panini
written by Ksirasvmin.
क्षीरतराङ्गणीसेकेत an abridgment of
क्षीरतरङ्गिणी by the author himself
See क्षीरतराङ्गणी..
क्षीरस्वामिन् a grammarian of Kashmir
of the 8th century who wrote the ;
famous commentary क्षीरतरङ्गिणी ora
the Amarakosa and a commentary
on the Nirukta of Yaska.
क्षुभ्नादि a class of wordings such as
क्षुभ्ना, तृप्नु and the like in which the
consonant न् is not changed into
ए although the consonant न् .is
preceded by ऋ, ऋ, र् or ， and int-
' ervemed by letters which are
admissible: e. g. क्षुभ्नाति, तृप्नोति,ढनमन
etc. cf Ks. on P. VIII. 4,39.
This class ( क्षुभ्नादिगण ) is styled as
आकृतिगण,.

_K_
क्षमकर
क्षेमंकर author of a commentary on
सारस्वतप्रक्रिया.
क्षेप्र (1) another name of the क्षिप्रसंधः
See the word क्षिप्र above: (2) .arne ;
given 1o the Svarita accent borne
by the vowel following the semi-
vowel which results from the Ksipra-
' samdhi; cf R. Pr. II. 8; III. 7,10;
VIII. 22: cf. इवणेकारयेोयैर्वक्रप्रभावे क्षेत्रं
उदात्तयोः W. Pr. xx. 1; cf. also युवर्णां
, य्वौ क्षेप्र: V. Pr I. 115: उदात्तस्वरितयेोर्यण:
स्वरितोनुदात्तस्य P. VIII. 2.4.
वेडन , hissing or whizzing sound
' given as a fault in the utterance
' of sibilants; cf. क्ष्चेडनमधिक्रो वर्णस्य सरूपेो
ध्बनि:	com. on R. Pr. XIW. 6.
क्स (1) aorist vikarana affix sub-
' stituted for लि: cf. P. III. 1. 45,46;
e. g. अदृक्षत्, आश्लिक्षत्, अधुक्षत् cf. Kas.
on P. III. 1. 45,46; (2) k!t affix स
applied to the root दृढ preceded by
a pronoun such as स्यद् , तद् etc. e.g.
. यादृक्षः, तादृक्ष: etc. cf. दृहेः क्सश्च वक्तव्य:
* P. III. 2. 60 Varttika. (3) affix स
appied to the root गाहृ or ख्यां or क
to form the noun कक्ष; cf. क्रक्षे गाहृतः
क्स्र इति नामकरण: ख्यत् क्षतेर्वा Nir.
II. 2.
क्सर्न Undi affix सर: cf. तन्वृषिभ्यां
क्सरन् Unadi III. 75.
विस Undi affix सि: cf.
' क्सि: Unadi III, 155.
क्से krt afix से in the sense of तुमुन्
, in Vedic Literature: e. g.प्रेषे (भगाय)
' KS. on III. 4. 9.
कुटुिषिभ्यः
&o
स्व
रू second consonant of the guttural
class of consonants possessed of
श्वासानुप्रदान, अघोष and विवार व्रualities.
ख tad. affix, always , changed into
ईन, (l) applied to the word कुल
4 in the sense of a descendant, e.g.
कुलीनः, आढकुलीनः: cf. P. IV. 1.139; |
126
~र्
(2) applied to the words अवार, पार,
पाराघर and अवारपारं in ' the SaiSika
senses, e. g. अवारीणः, परीण: etc.: cf.
P. IV.2.93 and Warttikas 2, 3 on
it: (3) applicd to words ending in
the word वर्ग ( which does not
mean 'sound or *lctter' ) in the
sense of * present there, ' e. g.
वासुदेववर्गण:, युधिष्ठिरवगौण:; cf. P. IV.
3.64 (4) applied to the , words
सवैधुर and एकंधुर in the sense of
*bearing,' and to ओजसु , वेढीभग,
यशेीभग and पूर्व, e. g. ओजसान:
etc., cf. P. IV. 4.78, 79, 130, 132,
133; (5) applied in the sense of
*favoura.ble to to the words आत्मन् ,
विश्वजन, etc. (P. V. 1.9), to विंशातक्र,
(32) to अाढक, अावित, पात्र and others
{53-55), to समा (85-86), to राात्र,
अहृन् , संवत्सर and वर्षे ( 87-88 )
and संवत्सर and परिवत्सर (92): e. g.
आत्मनीनः, आढकीनः पात्रीण:, समीन:, संवंत्स-
रीण: etc.: (6) to the words सईचमेने ,
यथामुख etc. e. g. सर्वचर्मण: cf. P. V.
2.5 to l7: (7) to the words अषडक्ष,
अाफीतंगु etc. cf. P. V. 4.7, 8. e. g.
अषडक्षीणः. (8) ख is also a technical
term in the sense of elision or
लेीप in the Jainendra Grammar
cf. Jain I. 1.61. (9) The word ख
is used in the sense of glottis' or
the hole of the throat ( गलबिल )
in the ancient Pritisakhya works.
ख्र the consonant ख्; sec ख.
खच् krt affix अ in the sense of
*agent applied to the roots वद्,
तापू , and यम् when preceded by
certain उपपद words standing as
objects. Bcfore this affix खच्, the
augment मुम् ( म् ) is added to the
preceding उपपद if it is not ' an
indeclinable. e. g. प्रियेवद:, वशंवदः,
द्विर्षतप: परंतपः वान्वंयम: etc. cf P. III.
2.38-47.
खञ्ज tad. affix ईन, applied to महाकुल
in the sense ofa descendant; e. g.
माहाकुलीनः cf. P. IV. 1.14l, to .ाम

रवण्ड
127
खिलपाठ
(P.. IV. 2.94), to युष्मद् and अस्मद्| खल् krt afix अ added to any root
in the Saisika senses (P. IV. 3.1),]
to प्रातजन, इदंयुग etc. (P. IV. 4.99),
to माणव and चरक (P. W..1.1l), to
ऋत्विज् (P. IV. 3.71), to मास (P. IV.
3.81), to words meaning corn in
the sense of * a field producing
corn' (P.V.2.1), to सर्वेश्चर्मन्(P.V.2.5),
and to the words गीष्ठ, अश्व, दाला etc.
in some specified senses (P. V.
3.18-23). A vrddhi vowel ( अा, छे
or औ ) is substituted for the first
vowel of the word to which this
, affix खऋ is applied, as ， is the
mute letter applied in the affix खच्.
खण्ड tad. affix applied to कमल, अम्भोज
etc. in the sense of समूहृ, e. g.
कमलखण्डम, अम्भोजखण्डम, also to the
words ऋक्ष and its synonyms, e. g.
वृक्षखण्डः, तरुखण्डः etc.: cf. Ks on P.
IV. 2.38, 51.
खण्डिकादि a class of words headed
by the word खण्डिका to which the
affix अञ् is added in the sense of
collection: e. g. खाण्डिकम् , वाडवम् ,
मैश्रुक्रम : cf. Kas. on P. IV.2.45.
खमुऋ krt affix अम् applied to the
root इ when preceded by a word
standing as the object of the root,
provided an abuse is meant, e. g.
चेरंकारं अाक्रीळति; cf. P. III. 4.25.
खय् the pratyahra खयू standing for
the first and second consonants
of the five classes; cf दापूर्वाः खयः
P. VII. 4.6; also cf P. VIII. 3.6,
VIII. 4.54.
खर् the pratyahara खर् standing for
hard consonants wiz. the first and
second letters of the five classes
and the sibilants, before which, स्
at the end of a word becomes
विखर्ग, and soft consonants i. e.
the third and fourth consonants of
the five classes become hard; cf.
खरवसानयोर्विसर्जनीयः P. VIII. 3.15,
and खरि व P. WIII. 4.55.
preceded by the word ईषद्, दुस् or
सु, and to the roots भू and इ pre-
ceded by an upadada word form-
ing either the subject or the
object of the roots, e. g. ईषत्करः
क्रटे भवता, ईषदाढ्यंभवं भवता: cf. P. III.
3.126, 127.
ख् krt affix added to the roots यज्ञ
(causal), माध, रुजु, बहु, लिहृ, पच् , दृश् ,
तप्, मन् etc, preceded by certain
specified upapada words. The
root undergoes all the operations
such as the addition of the con-
jugational sign etc. before this
सञ्जयon account of the mute letter
™L which makes खघ a Sarvadha-
tuka affix, and the augment म्
is added to the preceding उपपद if
it is not an indeclinable on
account of the mute lettcr ख:
e. g. जनमजयः, स्तनंधयः, नाडेिधमः, असूर्य!.
पद्यः पण्डितंमन्यः etc,; cf. Pan. III-
2.28-37, 83.
खित् characterized by the mute letter
ढ, applied to krt affixes which,
by reason of their being fखत् ,
cause (a) the addition of the aug-
ment मुम् ( म् ) to the preceding
words अरुस् , द्विषद् and words end-
ing in a vowel,and (b) the shorten-
ing of the long vowel of the
preceding word if it is not an
indeclinable: cf. P. WI. 3.66-68.
खिलपाठ a supplementary recital or
enunciation which is taken along
with the original enunciation or
upadesa generally in the form of
the sitras.The word is used in the
Kasik in the senseofone ofthe texts
forming a part of the original
text which is called upadeSa; cf.
Kasik उपदिश्यते अनेनेत्युपदेद: दास्त्रवाक्यानि
सूत्रपाठ: खिलपाठश्र (on P.I.3.2); cf. also
खिलपाठी धातुपाठः प्रातिपदिकपाठी वाक्यपीठश्च
Padamafijari on .Kईika.1.3.2.

त्र
<_X
खिष्णुच् krt affix इष्णु in the sense of|
ar agent added to the root √ >
c. g. अ,द्वयंभविष्णुः, रुधुलंभविष्णुः: cf. P.
III. 2.57.
बुकय् krt affix उक् in the sense of
an agent added to the root ,
c. g. आढ्यंभाबुक:, सुभगंभाबुक:: cf. P.
III. 2.57. Sce खिष्णुच्-
ख्युन् krt affix अन applied to the
foot कृ in the sense of an instru-
ment when preceded by the words
अाढय, सुभग, स्थ्ल etc. provided the
whole word is similar in sense
to cvi-formation ( च्यर्थ ), e.g. अाढथे
करणम् , सुभगंकरणम्: cf. P. III. 2.56;
fem. अाढचेक्ररणी, cf. नञ्स्नञ्जीक्रक्ख्युरूतरुण-
त्नानामुपसंख्यानमृ P.IV.1.15.Varttika.
गा
म्third letter of the guttural.class
of consonants, possessed of the
properties घोष, संवृत, नाद and अल्पप्राणः
some grammarians look upon the
word क्डित् (P.I.1.5) as made up of
क् , ग् and इ and say that the Guna
and Wrddhi substitutes do not take
place in the vowels इ, उ, ऋ, and ल
if an affix or so, marked by the
mute letter ग् follows.
गङ्गाधर [GANGADHARA SHASTRI
TELANG] (l) a stalwart gramm-
arian and Sanskrit scholar of
repute who was a pupil of Bala-
sarasvat of Varanasi and prepared
in the last century a host of Sans-
krit scholars in Banaras among
whom a spccial mention could be
made of Dr. Thebaut, Dr. Venis
and Dr. Ganganatha ]h∂. He was
given by Government of India the
titles Mahimahopadhyaya and C.
I.B.Hissurname wasMnavall but !
he was often known as गङ्गाघरास्त्री
तेलङ्ग. For details, see Mahabhasya,
128 गाणपाठ
(2)an old scholar of Vyakarana who
is believed to have written a com-
mentary on Vikrtavall of Vyadi;
(3) a comparatively modern scho-
lar who is said to have written a
commentary named Induprakasa
on the Sabdemdusekhara;(4) author
of the Wyikarahadipaprabhन, a
short commentary on the Vyaka-
raha work of Cidrºpsramin. See
चिदूपाश्रमिन्.
गङ्गइाइामीं writer of Kitantra-kaumudi
possibly different from the reput-
ed Gafgcsa Updhya who is
looked upon as the founder of the
Navyanyiya school of modern
Naiyayikas, and who lived in the
twelfih century A. D.
गजकुम्भाछाते a graphic description of
the Uihvamulfya letter as found
in script, given by Durgasirhha;
cf. गजकुम्भाकृतिर्वर्ण उपध्मानीयसंज्ञो भवति
Durgasirhha's com. om Kat. I.1.
18. see c9 ( उपधानीय ).
गण a class of words, as found in the
stºtras of Painini by the mention
of the first word followed by the
word इति; .e.g. स्वरादि, सर्वादि, ऊर्यादि,
भ्वादि, अदादि, गगौदि etc. Thc ten
ganas or classes of roots given by
Panini in his dhtuptha are given
the name Da5agar by later
grammarians.
गणपाठ the mention individually of
the several words forming a class
or gana, named after the first word
said to have becn written by Panini
himselfas a supplementary work
to his greatgrammar called Astaka
or Astidhyay, the Sika,the Dhtu-
patha and the Lingnussana being
the otherones.Other grammarians
such as द्राकटायन, अापिशाले and others
have their own ganapathas. The
ganapatha is traditionally ascrib-
D.E. Society Ed.Poona p.p.33, 34; | ed to Panini; the issue is question-

गणरत्नमहोदधि
ed, however, by modern scholars.
The text of the ganapa:ha is
metrically arranged by some
scholars. The most scholarly and
authoritative treatise on ganap3-
tha is the Gajjaratnamahodadhi
of Vardhamana.
गणरत्नमहोदाघ a grammar work,consi-
sting of a metrical enumeration
of the words in the Ganapatha of
Panini, written by Vardhamana, a
Jain grammarian of the 12th
century, who is believed to have
been one of the six gems at
the court of Laksmanasena of
Bengal. Wardhamana has written
a commentary also, on his Gaja-
ratnamahodadhi. Besides Wardha-
mana's commentary, there are
other commentaries written by
गोवर्धन and गङ्गाधर.
गणरत्नमहोदधिटीका also called गणरत्न-
महेीदधिवृति, a commentary on
the गणरत्नमहोदधि of Wardhamana
written by the author himself. See
गणरत्नमहोदधि.
__ -
गणरत्नमहोद्ध्यवच्रि a metrical com-
mentary on Wardhamana's Gana-
ratnamahodadhi. The name of the |
author is not available.
गणस्त्र a statement of the type of a
Sutra in the Ganapatha of Panini
where mention of a word or words
in the Ganapatha is made along
with certain conditions; e. g.
पूर्वपुरावरo, स्वमज्ञातिधनाख्यायाम् , in the
सर्वादिगण, and क्त्वातेसुन्कसुनः, तसिलादय:
प्राक्पाट्टापः in the स्वरादिगण. Some of
the ganasutras are found incorpo-
rated in the Stitrapaha itself
Many later grammarians have
appended their own ganapatha to
their Sitrapatha.
गणसूत्रविचार a commentary on the
Ganapatha of Panini written by
17
129
गत्यर्थे
Mannudeva who flourished in the
nineteenth century.
गति (1) lit. motion stretching out,
lengthening ofa syllable,The word
is explained in the Pratisakhya
works which define it as the
lengthening ofa Stobha vowel with
the utterance of the vowel इ or उ
affer it, e.g. ह्याइ or इायि for हा: simi-
larly आ-इ or अा -थि ; (2) a tech-
nical term used by Panini in con-
nection with prefixes and certain
indeclinables which are called गति,
cf. P.I.4,60-79. The words called
gati can be compounded with the
following word provided the latter
is not a verb, the compound being
named tatpurusa e.g, प्रकृतम् , ऊरीकृत्य
cf. P.II.2.18; the word गति is used
by Phini in the masculine gender
as seen in the Stitra गतिरनन्तरः P.WI.
2.49 and hence explained as form-
ed by the addition of the affix क्तिच्
to गम्, the word being used as a
technical term by the rule क्तिच्क्तौ च
संज्ञायाम् P.III.3.174; (3) realization,
understanding; cf उभयगतिरिहृ भवृति
Par. Sek. Pari.9;सांप्रतिकाभावे भूतपूर्वगतिः
Par. Sek. Pari 76; अगत्या हि परिभाषा
अाश्रीयत Purusottamadeva Pari.
Pagha 119.
गतिकारकपरिभाषा a popular name
given to the maxim गतिकारकंौपपदानां
कृद्भिः सह समासवचनं प्राक् सुबुत्पत्त:: cf. Par.
Sek. Pari. 75.
गतिनिघात the grave ( अनुदात्त ) accent
of the गति word before a verb with
an acute ( उदात्त ) accent; cf. तिडि
चोदात्तवति P. VIII.1.71.
गातेसमास a compound with the prece-
ding gati word prescribed by the
rule कुगतिप्रादयः P.II. 2.18; cf. गति-
सुमास्तु निष्क्रौशाम्ब:, निर्वाराणसि: M.Bh.
on II. 4. 26.
|गत्यु a root denoting motion; the
| word frequently occurs in the

Stras of Panini and theMahabh∂-
sya in connection with some special
operations prescribed for roots
which are गत्यर्थ. There is also a
conventional expression सर्वे गत्यर्था
ज्ञानार्था: meaning * roots denoting
motion denote also knowledge': cf.
Hem. Pari. 12I .
गाद a popular name given to the |
scholarly commentary written by
Vaidyanatha Pyagunde on the
Paribhasendusekhara. The comm-
entary is called काक्राक्रा also, as it
was written in the town of KS
(Varanas).
पादाधरचक्रवर्तिन् the reprited Naiy-
" yika who wrote numerous works
on the Navyanyaya; he has written
a few works like व्युत्पातवाद, उपसर्ग-
धिचार, कारकनिर्णय, सर्वनामावेश्वार, प्रत्ययविचार
on Vyakarana themes although the
treatment, as also the style, is
logical.
गन्तव्य that which should be under-
stood; the word is used in the
sense of अवगन्तब्य: cf. तत्र संबन्धादेतद्-
न्तव्यम् M. Bh. on I. 1.9.
गमक capable of conveying the sense;
intelligible the word is often used
in grammatical works: cf. सपक्षलेचपि
गमकत्वात्समास:;cf. also अवद्यं कस्याचिन्नञ्स-
मासस्य असमर्थसमासस्य गमकस्य साधुत्वं
वंक्तव्यम् " असूर्यपद्यानि मुखानि M. Bh. 6n
II. 1. 1.
ग्ास्य to be understood,not expressed;
cf. यस्यार्थं गम्यते न च इाब्दः प्रयुज्यते स गम्यः
com. om Hem. II. 2. 62.
गम्यादि a class of words headed by
the word गमीं which are formed
by the application of unadi affixes
in the sense of future time: e. g.
गमी ग्रामम् , अागामी, प्रस्थायी etc. cf.
Ka8. on P. III. 3. 3.
गरीयस् involving a special effort.The
word is frequently used by the
Wrttikakara and old grammari-
गलत्पद्
ans in connection with
thing, which involves greater
effort and longer expression
and, hence, not commendable
in rules of the Shastra works
where brevity is the soul of *wit ';
cf पदगौरवाद्योगवेिभागी गरीयान् Par. Sek.
Pari. 121. The word गुरु is also
sometimes used in a similar sense;
cf. तद् गुरु भवति M. Bh. [.1 Ahn. l
Vart. 2.
गरीयस्त्व greater effort or prolixity of
expression which is looked upon
as a fault in connection with
grammar-works of the sutra type
where every care is taken to make
the expression as brief as possible:
cf. अर्धमात्रालाघवेन पुत्रोत्सवं मन्यन्ते वैयाकरणाः
Par. Sek. Pari. 22. The word गौरव
is often used for गरीयस्त्व.
गगोदिगण a class of words headed
by गर्ग to which the affix यऋ, ( य )
causing Viddhi to the first vowel
of the word, is added in the sense
of a descendant barring the son
or daughter: cf. गर्गादिभ्यो यत्र P. IV.
1 105 and the instances गाम्यैः,
वात्स्य:, वैयाघ्रपद्य:, पौलस्य: cf. Kas. on
P. IV. 1. 105.
गर्भवत् lit. just like a foctus. The
word is used in connection with
affixes that are placed like a foetus
in the midst of a word in spite
of the rule that affixes are to be
placed after: cf. परश्च P. III. 1. 2.
The affixes अक्रच् , टाप् etc. are of
this kind; cf. गर्भवेढाबाद्ये भवन्ति | यथा
मध्य गर्भस्तथा टाबादयः स्त्रीप्रत्ययाः प्रातिपदि-
क्रस्वाद्योमेय भवन्ति Sradeva Par. Wr.
Pari. 9l .
गलत्पद् the word occurs in the Pratis-
akhya works in connection with
the definition of संक्रम,in the krama-
patha. The word संक्रम means bring-
ing together two words when they
are combined according to rules
SOmme-

गवादि
131
गुण
of Sarhdhi. (See the word संक्रम).
In the Kramapagha, where
each word occurs twice by repeti-
tion, a word occurring twice in a
hymn or a sentence is not to be
repeated for Kramapatha, but it
is to be passed over. The word
which is passed over in the
Kramapatha is called गलत्पद: e. g.
दिदां च पतये नमो नमो वृक्षेभ्यो हृरिकेशेभ्यः
पशूनां पतय नमो नमः सस्पिञ्जराय त्विषीमत
' पथीनां पतय नमः | In the Kramap-
tha पतये नम: and नम: are passed
* over and पन्नां is to be connected
' with सस्पिञ्जराय, The words पतय नम:
* and नमः are called galatpada ;
cf. गलत्पदमतिक्रम्य अगलता सहृ संधानं सेक्रम;
V. Pr. IV. 197. There is no
गलत्पद in पदपाठ.
गवादि a class of words headed by
' the word गे to which the affix
यत् is affixed in the senses men-
tioned in rules from P. W. 1, 5.
to V. 1. 36: e. g. गव्यम् , हृविष्यम्
* युग्यम् , मध्यम् etc.: cf. Kas. on P.
V. 1,2.
गवाश्वप्रभृति the dvandva compound
' wordsगवाश्र, गवावक्र गवैडक्र, अजावेक,
कुब्जमाणवक, पुत्रपौत्र मांसदोणित and
others which are to be declined
' in the neuter gender and singular
number; cf. P, II. 4.11.
गहृादि a class of words headed by
' the word गहृ to which the tad-
dhita affix ईय (छ) is added in the
" Saisika or miscellaneous senses;
e. g. गहृीयम् , अन्तस्थीयम्; this class
called *gahya' is looked upon
, as अाकृतिगण, and hence the
*. words वैणुकीयंम् वैत्रकीयम् and the
' , like could be explained as correct;
'' cf Kas. on P. IV. 2.138.
गाग्ये an ancient reputed grammarian
. and possibly a writer of a Niru-
, kta work, whose views, especially
in.connection with accents are
}
given im the Pratisakhya works,
the Nirukta and Painis Ast्-
dhyay. Although belonging to
the Nirukta school, he upheld the
view of the Vaiyakaranas that all
words cannot be derived, but
only some of them: cf Nir. I.
12.3. cf, also V. Pr. IV. 167, Nir.
I. 3.5, III. 14.22: R. Pr. I. 13;
XIII. 12: P. VII. 3.99, VIII.
3.20, VIII. 4.69.
गालव an ancient grammarian and
niruktakra quoted by Panini;
cf. P. VI 3.60, VII. I.74, VII.
3,99, VIII. 4.67, cf. also Nir.
IV. 3.
गाच a technical term for the term
अाङ्ग (pertaining to the base in the
grammar of Phini); cf. वार्णात् गावै
बलीयः Kat. Pari. 72.
a conventional term for उपसर्ग in
the Jeinendra Vyākarana.
गित् marked with the mute letter ग्र;
affixes that are गित् prevent guna
or vpddhi in the preceding word;
cf. क्क्ङिति च P. I. 1.5; cf. also M.
Bh. I. 3.10; III. 2.I39: cf. also
गकारोप्यत्र चत्र्वभूतो निर्दिश्यते Kas. on
P. I. 1.5.
गिरिधर writer of विभक्त्यर्थनिर्णय, a work
on syntax.
गीर्वाणपद्मञ्जरी a grammatical work
written by वरदराज, pupil of Bha-
toj Dikgita in the 17th century
who wrote many works on gram-
mar such as मध्यकौमुदी, लधुर्कौमुदी etc.
गुडादि a class of words headed by the
word गुड to which the taddhita
affix इकं ( ठञ् ) is added in the
sense of good therein': e.g. गौडिक
इक्षुः, कौमाषिकं मुद्:: cf. K. on F
IV. 4.103.
गुण (1) degree of a vowel: .vogalic
degree, the second out of the three
degrees of a vowel vi2. primary
गि

c
गुणकर्मन्
132
गुख्
degree, guna degree and viddhi
degree e.g. इ, ए and ए or ड, ओ
and औौ. अis given as a guna of अः
but regarding अ also,three degrees
can be stated अ, अ and अ. In the
Pratisakhya and Nirukta ए is
called गुण or even गुणागम but no
definiti6n is given : cf. गुणागमदतन-
' भावि वतन R.Pr.XI.6;ीवम् इति विभीषि-
तगुण:	शेवमित्यपि भवति Nir.k.17: (2)
the properties of phonetic elements
or ietters such asश्वास,नाद etc.: cfR-
Pr. Ch.XIII : (3) secondary, sub-
ordinate;cf. शेषः,अङ्ग, गुणः इति समानार्थाः
Durgācārya on Nir. L.12: (4) pro-
perties residing in a substance just
as whiteness, etc. in a garment
which are different from the sub-
stance ( द्रव्य ). The word गुण is
explained by guotations , from
ancient grammarians in the Maha
bhya as सत्वे निविशतेपैति पृथग्जातिषु
दृद्यंतं ， अाधयश्चाक्रियाजश्च सेीSसल्वप्रसिक्तर्गण: 1
अपर आहृ|उपैत्यन्यज्जहृत्यन्यद् दृष्टो द्रव्यान्तरेष्वपि
बान्वक: सर्वलिङ्गानां द्रव्यादन्येो गुणः स्मृतः ;
M. Bh. on IV.1.44;cf also इब्दस्पर्श-
रूपरसगन्धा गुणास्ततोन्यद् द्रव्यम् ,M.Bh.on
V.1.119 (5) properties of letters
like उदात्तत्व, अनुदात्तत्व, स्वरितत्व, हृस्व-
त्व, दीधेत्य, प्लुतत्व, अानुनासिक्य etc.: cf.
भदकल्वाद् गुणस्य ， आनुनासिक्यं नाम गुण:
M. Bh. on I.1.1.. Vart, 13: (6)
determinant cfभवति बहुव्रीहौ तद्गुणसंवे-
ज्ञानमपि M. Bh. on P. I. 1.27: (7)
technical term in Panini's grarn-
गुण | गुणे गुणकर्मणि	cf also गुणकर्मणि
लेदिविधि: संपेर M.Bh. on I. 4,51.
गुणकीर्ति a Jain writer of the thir-
teenth century who wrote a com-
mentary named कातन्त्रवृतिाटप्पणी on
दुर्गसिंहृवृत्ति.
गुणभाविन् a vowel, liable to take the
guna substitute e. g. इ, उ, ऋ, ल
and the penultimate अ: cf. यत्र
डित्यनन्तरो गुणेभाव्यस्ति तत्रैव स्यात् ， चितम् |
स्तुतम् , इह तु न स्याद्भिन्नः भिन्नवानिति ;
M. Bh. on I. 1.6.
गुणभेद् difference in properties; cf.
एकेायमात्मा उदकं नाम तस्य गुणभदादन्यत्वे
भवति | अन्यदिदं ऋीतमन्यदिदमुष्णामति | M.
Bh. on I, 1.2.
गुणबचन lit. expressing quality words
expressing quality such as शुकू,
नील, etc.; cf. गुणवचनब्राह्मणादिभ्यः कर्मणि च
P.V. 1.124. See page 369 Vyāka-
rana Mahabhasya Vol. VII. D.E.
Society edition, Poona.
गुणादि a class of words headed by
the word गुण, which, when pre-
ceded by the word बहु in a
Bahuvrhi compound, do not have
their last vowel acute: e. g. वहुगुणा
रज्जु: ; बह्वक्षरं पदम् , etc. This class
of गुणादि words is considered as
आकृतिगण; cf. KS, on P. VI. 2.176.
गुणिन् possessed of a quality ; cf इहृ
कदाचिद् गुणे गुणिविशेषकं भवति | तद्यथा
पट: शुक्इति ， कदाचिच गुणिना गुणो व्यपदिश्यत !
mar standing for the vowels अ, ए
and ओी, cf. अदेङ् गुणः P.1.1.2. For the
various shades of the meaning of |
the word गुण, see Mahabhasya on
V.1.119. " गुणज्ञाव्दीयं बह्वर्थः ' अरत्येव
समष्ववयवेषु वर्तते ...... वत्वगुणांश्च ;
&
गुणकमंन a term used by the an-
cient grammarians for the गीणकर्मन्
or indirect object of a verb
|
पटस्य शुक्लः इति	M. Bh. on I.4.21.
_ subordinate, lit. which has
become subordinated, which has
become submerged, and therefore
has formed an integral part of
another: e. g. an augment ( अागम )
with respect to the word to which
it has been added;cf.
भुतास्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यन्ते | M. Bh. I.
Vart. 5; Par. Sek. Pari. 11.
i20
having two objects. The word | युख (1) possessed of a special effort
is found quoted in the Mahabha-
ya; cf. कथिते लादयश्चेत्स्युः षष्ठीं कुर्यात्तदा
as opposed to लबु: cf. तद् गुरु भवति
M. Bh. Ahnika 1- (2) heavy, a

गुख्मत्
133 गोनर्दीय
technical term including दुर्ध
Glong) vowel as also a हुस्च (short) ]
vowel when it is followed by a !
comjunct consonant, (cf. संयेगे
गुरु i दीजै च	P. I. 4.11, 12) or a
consonant after which the word
terminates or when it (the vowel)
is nasalized; cf. Tai. Pr. XXII.
14, cf. also R. Pr. I. 5.
ठढम् 3 word containing a गुरु vowel
in it cf. इजादेश्च गुरुमतोनृच्छः PiII.1.36.
ग्रॅलधुतt consideration of prolixity
and brevity of expression: cf.
तत्राप्ययं नावश्यं गुरुलघुतामेवोपलक्षाचेतुमर्हति !
M. Bh. on I.1.1.
ण्य्लाघव the same as गुरुलघुता which
see above: cf पर्यायदाव्दानां गुरुलाघवन्वचां
नाद्रियते Siradeva Pari. 125
ग् neld up or caught between two
words with which it is connected;
eg the word असि in इयं ते राट् यन्ता
असि यमनः धुव: धरुणः	cf. V. Pr.
IV. 176.
ग्रडफाक्काप्रकाशा a short gloss on the
Siddhāntakaumud of Bhagoj
Dksita, by Indradatta,
गृढभाववृत्ति a commentary on Rama-
candras Prakriya Kaumud , by
Krsnasesa of the famous Sea
family of grammarians, The
date of this Krsnasesa is the
middle of the sixteenth century.
For , details about Krshasesa and
the Sesa family see introduction to
Prakriyakaumudi B. S. S. No. 78.
शूढार्थदीपिनी a commentary ( वृात ) on |*
the stras of Panini by Sadasiva
Misra who lived in the seven-
teenth century.
शूढार्थप्रकाशा a commentary on the
Laghusabdendusekhara by M. M.
Vasudeva Shastri Abhyankar
< (1863-1942). _
गृष्टयादि a class of words headed by
the word गृधि to which the taddhita
affix एय (ढञ्) is affixed in the sense
offan offspring' ( अपत्य): e g. गाय:,
हृलयः etc.; cf. Ks. on P. IV.1.136.
ग्रडीत included; cf. भ्राजादिसूत्र एव
गृहीतत्वात् Kas. onP. III. 2.178.
गोणिकापुत्र a grammarian whose wiew
in connection with the correct-
ness of the expressions नेताश्वस्य बुन्नं
and नताश्वस्य सुन्नस्य is given by the
Mahabhasyakra in the words
*both expressions are justified'
( उभयथा गेणिकापुत्रः ). Nagesa has
observed that गेोणिकापुत्र is nobody
else but the Mahabhasyakara
himself: cf. गोणिकापुत्रः भाष्यकार इत्याहुः |
NageSa's Uddyota on Mahabha-
syapradipa on P. I. 4.5I.
गोत्र lit. family. The word is used
by Panini in the technical sense
of a descendant except the son
or a daughter; cf. अपत्यं पौत्रप्रभृति
गेीत्रम् P. IV. 1.162. The word
गोत्रापत्य is also used in the same
sense, The affix, which is found
many times in the sense of gotra,
barring the usual अणु , is यनू ; cf.
गगदिभ्यो यञ् P. IV. 1.105.
गोत्रप्रत्यय affix in the sense of गोत्र:
cf. यश्चासौ गोत्रप्रत्ययः प्राप्नोति स एकः स्यात्
M. Bh.on IW. 1.93.
गीनर्दय lit. inhabitant of Gonarda
which was the name of a district.
in the province of Oudh in the
days of the Mahabhasyakara
according to some scholars. Others
believe that Gonarda was the
name of the district named
Gonda at present The expression
गेनर्दय अाहृ occurs four times in the
Mahabhsya where it refers to a
scholar of grammar in Patafijalis
time; cf M.Bh. on I. 1.21 ; I. 1.29;
III. ].92; VII. 2.101. As Kaiyata
paraphrases the words गेानद्यस्त्वाहृ
as भाष्यकाररूवाहृ, scholars say that
गेीनदय was the name taken by the

गोपवनादि
Mahabhasyakra himselfwho was a
resident of Gonarda. Hari DikSita,
however. holds that गीनदय was the
term used for the author of the .
Varttikas; cf. Brhacchabdaratma.
गोपवनादि a class of eight words head-
ed by the word गेीपवन, the taddhita
affixin the sense of गेत्र ( i. e. a
, descendant excepting a son or a
, daughter) such as the affix यम् or
* अञ्जू after which, is not elided in
the plural number; c. g. गौपवना:,
ईौग्रवा: etc.; cf. KS. on P. II. 4.67.
गोपाल ( देव ) known more by the
' nickname of मलुदेव or मन्तुदेव who
' lived in the eighteemth century
and wrote several commentary
works on well-known grammatical
treatises such as the Waiyakaraha-
bhisahasra, Laghusabdenduse-
, khara, Paribhasendusekhara etc. He
: is believed to have written a
, treatise on Ganasपेtras also; (2)
a grammarian different from the
, above मन्नुदेव who has written an
explanatory work on the Prti-
sakhyas;.(3) a scholar of grammar,
, different from the above who is
' 'believed to have written a gloss
named Visamarthadipik on the
Saraswata Vyakara'a at the end of
* the sixtee.1th century.
गोपीचन्द्र known also by the name
, गेयींवद् who .has written several
commentary works on the gram-
' matical treatises of the Sarhkip- |.
: tasara or Jaumāra school of Vy-
| karaa fotinded by Kramdsvara
and Jumaranandin in the 12th
century, the well-known among
them being the संक्षितसारटका, सांक्षत-
, सरपंरिभाषासूत्रटीका and तद्धितपरिकिटटक्रा.
| He is believed to have lived in
the thirteenth century A. D.
गोपीनाथa Bengali scholar of Katan-
stral.Grammar.who is believed to
134
गोष्ठच्
have written Kitantraparisija-
praddyota.
गोयीचन्द्र see गेीयचन्द्र.
गोयुगव् a ta!. affix applied to nouns
like अश्व, उट्, etc. in the sense of a
paire. g. उष्ट्रगीयुगम्, अश्वयीयुगम्: cf.
द्वित्वे गेयुगच् Ks on P. V. 2.29.
गोल्ड्स्ट्यूकर a well known German
scholar who made a sound study
ofPaini's SanskritVyakarana and
wrote a very informative trea-
tise entitled *Panini, his place in
Sanskrit Literature.* He lived in
the latter half of the 19th century.
गोवर्धन a grammarian who has writ-
ten a work on Katantra Grammar
called कातन्त्रक्रीमुदी and also a com-
tmentary on the Ganaratnamaho-
dadhi of Vardhamana. A gloss on
the Uadistras is also assigned to
Govardhana who is likely to be
the same as abowe.
गोविन्द् writer of a commentary known -
as अप्वा कत्रीं by reason of that work
beginning with the stan2a अम्बा
कत्र्, on the ParibhSendusekhara
of Nigesa. _ * --
↑वि=द् ( चक्रवर्तिन् ) writer of Samsa-
vda, a short treatise on the sense
conveyed by compound words.
गोत्रिन्द्रम writer of Sabdadipik,' a
commentary on the Mugdha-
bodha Vyakarana of Bopadeva.
गींषदादेि a class of words to which
the taddhita affix अक्र ( हुन् ) is
added in the sense of possession
provided the word so formcd refers
to a chapter ( अध्याय )' or a section
( अनुवाक ) c. देवामुर:, वैमुक्त: etc.: cf.
. KRS, on P. V. 2.62. , ' ' ;
गोष्ठच् a tad.affix applied to words like
गो and others in the sense of a pla-
, ce'; cf. गेष्ठजादयः स्थानादिषु पशुनाम पशूना-
' माादेभ्य उपसंख्यानम् | गवां स्थानं मीगोठम्,
{. अधुगोष्ठम्: महिषीगोष्ठम्Ka.on P.v.2.29

गांण
135
प्रास्त
It is very likely that words like
* गेष्ठ, दन्न and others were treated as ]
' pratyayas by Panini and katyayana
* who followed Panini, because they
were found always associated with
a noun preceding them and never
independently.
गेण (l) a word subordinate in syntax
or sense to another adjectival;
उपसर्जनीभूतः (2) possessing a second-
. ary sense, e. g the word गा in the
.. sense of*a dull man';cf.गौणमुख्ययेामुख्ये
| कायेसेमत्ययः, M. Bh. on I.1.15, I.4.
108, VI. 3. 46. See also Par.
. Sek Pari. 13; (3) secondary, as
' opposed to primary: cf. गेणं कर्मणि
दुह्यादेः प्रधान नीहृकृष्वहाम् .
गौणमुख्यन्याय the maxim that the
. primary sense.occurs to the mind
< earlier than the secondary sense,
and hence words used in the pri-
mary sense should be always
taken for grammatical operations
in preference to words in a secon-
, dary sense. See the word गेोण. '
गौतम an ancient sage referred to in
the PratiSikhya works as a Prati-
sakhyakara: cf T.Pr. V.38.
गौरव greatness of effort; prolixity as
opposed to लाघव: cf.. पर्यायशब्दानां
लाघवगेरवचत्वं नाद्रियत Par.Sek.Par.115;
cf also पदगौरवाद्योगविभागो गरीयान् Par.
Sek. Pari. 121.
गोरादि a class of words to which the
affix ई ( डीम्) is added to form the
feminine base: e.g. गौरी, मत्सी, हृयो,
हृरिणी; the class contains a large
number ofwords exceeding 150;
for details see Ksik on P.IV.1.
41; (2) a small class of eleven
words, headed by the word गौर
which do not have the acute
accent on the last syllable in a
tatpurusa compound when they are
placed after the preposition उप: cf.
P, VI.2.194.
ग्मिन् tad. affix in the sense of posses>
sion; cf. वाचो ग्मिनिः वाग्मी	P.I.2.124.
श्रस्त a fault of pronunciation due to
the utterance of a letter hindered
or held back at the throat: cf.
जिह्वामूलनिग्रहे ग्रतमेतत् R.Pr.XIV.3; cf.
also ग्रस्तं निरस्तमवलम्बितम् | ग्रस्तः जिह्वामूले
ग्रहृत: | अव्यक्त इत्यपरे	Pradipa on
M. Bh. Ahnika 1.
| प्रहृण (1) technical term for a word
or प्रातिपदिक in Veda; cf. ग्रहृणस्य च |
～ गृह्यत इति प्रहृणं वेदर्थ: इाब्दः , तत् त्रिविधम् |
कार्यभाकू, निमित्तम्, उपबन्ध इति | तस्यापि
स्वरूपपूर्वकेः अकार: आख्या भवति | Com. on
T.Pr.I.22; (2) citing, guoting; cf.
प्रहृणवता प्रातिपादिकेन न तदन्तावधि: Par.Sek.
Pari. 3I ; cf. also गृहृन्तोति ग्रहृणाान
Com. on T.Pr.I.24. (3) mention,
inclusion; (4) employment in a
rule of grammar: cf. .प्रातिपादकग्रहृणे
लिङ्गविशिष्टस्यापि ग्रहृणम्. Par. Sek.Pari.71.
अदृणक् citing or instructing the inclu-
sion ( ग्रहृण) of certain other things
by the mention of a particular
thing: e. g. the rule अणुदित्सवर्णस्य
चाप्रत्ययः is a ग्रहृणक्र rule as it advises
that the citing of the letters अ, इ,
उ, ऋ etc. includes the º long and
protracted forms of अ, इ, उ etc; cf.
also ग्रहृणक्रशास्त्रस्य सावण्र्यविधिनिषधीभ्यां
प्रागनिष्पत: Sid. Kau. on अक्र: सवर्ण दीर्धः
V1. 1. 101.
ग्रहणवत् specifically mentioned in a
rule, individually mentioned;	cf.
ग्रहणवता प्रातिपादकेन तेदन्तविधिर्नास्ति	Par.
Sek.Pari.31. See the word ग्रहृण.
ग्रहाद a class of roots headed by the
root महृ to which the affix इन् (णिनि),
causing vrddhi to the preceding
vowel of the root, is added in the
sense of an agent: e.g. श्राद्दी, उत्साही,
स्थायी, मन्त्री etc.; cf Kas. on P.III.
1.134.
ग्रास a fault in the utterance of a
letter which makes it indistinct by
being held up at the.throat.Sceग्ररुत.

ग्स्नु
136
_______ धित्
ग्स्नु krt affix रुनु applied to the roots
लै, जि and स्था in the sense of an
agent: cf. ग्लाजिस्थश्च क्स्नुः P.III.1.139.
घ
घ (1) fourth consonant of the gut-
tural class of consonants having
the properties कण्ठसंहृतत्व, बीष,
नादानुप्रदानत्व and महृाप्राणत्त्र; (2)the con-
sonant घ at the beginning of a
tad. affix which is always chang-
ed into इय्: cf. P. VII. 1. 9; (3)
substitute for ， at the end of roots
beginning with द्,as also ofthe root
नहु under certain conditions; cf.
P.'VIII.2.32,33,34: (4) substitute
for the consonant व् of मतुम् placed
after the pronouns क्रिम and इदम्
which again is changed into इय् by
VII.1.9: e.g. क्रियान्, इयान्: cf. P.V.
2.40.
घ (l) consonant घ, अ being added at
the end for facility of pronuncia-
tion; cfTai. Pr.I.21; (2) technical
term for the tad. affixes तरप् and
तमप्, cf P.I.1.22, causing the short-
ening of ई at the end of bases
before it, under certain conditions,
cf. P. WI. 3.43-45, and liable to
be changed into तराम् and तमाम्
after किम्, verbs ending in ए, and
indeclinables; cf. P.V.4.11; (3)
tad. affix घ ( इय) in the sense of*a
descendant' applied to क्षत्र, and in
the sense of *having that as a
deity' applied to अपोनप्तृ अपांनप्तृ and
also to महेन्द्र and to the words राष्ट्र
etc., e.g. क्षत्रिय:, अपोनात्रय:, अपांनप्त्रियः,
मइन्द्रियम्,राष्ट्रिय: etc.: cf. P. IV.1.138,
IV.2.27, 29, 93; (4) tad. affix घ,
applied to अग्र, समुद्र and अभ्र in the
sense of*present there', to सहृख in
the sense of *possession', to, नक्षत्र
without amy change of sense, and
to यश and ऋत्विज् in the sense of
*deserving'; cf. P.IV.4.117,118,135,
136,141, V.1.71 ; (5) krt affix अ
when the word to which it has
been applied becomes a proper
noun i.e.a noun in a specific sense
or a technical term; cf. III.3. 118,
1]9,125.
घकार the consonant घ: see .
घच( tad. affix इय, as found in the
word क्षेत्रिय, cf. क्षेत्रियच् परक्षेत्र चिाकत्स्यः
P.V.2.92 and Kasika thereon.
घऋ krt affix अ causing the substitu-
tion of vrddhi for the preceding
vowel applied in various senses as
specified in P.III.3. 16-42, III.3.
45-55,III.3.120-125, e.g. पाद:, रोग:,
आय:, भावः, अवग्राहृ: प्रावारः, अवतार:, लेखः
राग: etc
घन tad. affix अ applied to the words
ढक्र, ढग्र, पात्र, and to multisyllabic
words in specified senses, causing
the acute accent on the first vowel
of the word so formed; cf.IV.2.26,
IV.4. 1 15, V.1.68, V.3.79, 80.
घन a variety of the क्रमपाठ or recital of
the Vedic hymns to show the serial
order of words there; one of the
eight vikrtis of the padapgha.
घस् tad, affix इय, occurring in Vedic
Literature,applied to the word ऋतु,
e.g. अयं त येीनिर्कत्वियः: cf. Ks on F.
W.1.106,
घि (1) a tech. term applied to noun
bases or Pratipadikas ending in इ
and उ excepting the words सखि
and पति and those which are term-
ed नदी: cf. P. I. 4.79; (2) a conven-
tional term for लधु ( a short vowel)
found used in the Jainendra
Vyakarana.
घित् affixes having the mute letter धु,
as for instance, घ् घ, घच् etc.which
cause the substitution of a guttu-
ral in the place of the palatal
letter ， or जु before it: e.g. त्याग:
राग: cf. P.VII.3.52.

घिनुण्
घिनुण् krt affix इन् causing the su! s-
titution of Vrddhi for the preced-
ing vowel, as also to the penulti-
mate vowel अ, applied to the eight
roots √ाम्,तम्, दम् etc., as also toसंदृच्,
अनुरुध् etc. and कसु, लष् लप्, etc.. e. g.
इामी,तमी, दमी, संपर्क, संज्वारी, प्रलापी etc.:
cf. P. III.2.141-145.
घिसंज्ञ (noun bases or Pratipadikas)
called or termed घि. See घि.
< a tech. term applied to the roots
दा and धा, as also to those like दे or
दे which become द by the substi-
tution of अा for the final diphthong
vowel, barring the root दापू (to
cut) and दैप् (to purify): cf. दांधा
थ्वदाप् P.I. 1.20.
घट् a conventional term for the
first five case-affixes; cf. धुटि च Kt.
II. 1.68. The term बुट् is used in
the Katantra Vyakarana and cor-
responds to the term सर्वनामस्थान of
Panini.
धुरच् krt affix उर applied to the
roots भञ्ज् ,भास् and भिदृ in the sense
of habit: e.g. भङ्गुरं काष्ठम् भासुरं ज्योतिः,
मदुर: पशु:: cf. Ks on P.III.2.161.
घोष an external effort in the pronun-
ciation of a sonant or a soft con-
sonant which causes depth of the
tone: cf. अन्ये तु घोषाः स्युः सेवृताः etc.,
Sid. Kau. on VIII. 2. 1 .
घोषवत् a consonant characterized by
the property घीष्， at the time of its
utterance: cf. तृतीयचतुर्थाः संवृतकण्ठाः
नादानुप्रदाना घोषवन्त: M.Bh. on P,I.1.9.
ड
ड् (1) fifth letter of the guttural class
ofconsonants having the properties
कण्ठसंवृतत्व, घोष, नादानुप्रदान, अल्पप्राणत्व
and अानुनासिक्य: (2) the consonant ङ्क
getting the letter ， as an aug-
18
137
fड
ment added to it, if standing at
the end of a word and followed
by a sibilant, e. g. प्राङ्क्त cf. ङ्कणी:
कुक् ढक् ढारि P. VIII. 3.28; (3) the
consonant ड् which, standing at
the end of a word and preceded
by a short vowel, causes the vowel
following it to get the augment
ङ्क prefixed to it; e. g, प्रत्यङ्कडास्ते, cf.
डम हृस्वादचि ङमुण् नित्यम् P. VI 1 I.3.32.
ड (1) fifth consonant of the guttural
class of consonants which is a
nasal ( अनुनारीक ) consonant; the
vowel अ being added at the end
for facility of pronunciation : cf. T.
Pr. I.21; (2) a conventional term
used for all the nasal consonants
in the.jainendra Vyakaraja.
डश्र् a short term or Pratyahara
standing for the letters ड्, ए, न् ,
इव् , and भू , casually mentioned in
the Mahabhasya; cf. एतदप्यस्तु ञ्जक्रांरेण
डञ्जो हुस्वादचि डबुपिनत्यमिति | M. Bh. on
Mahesvara Sutras 8, 9.
डम् a short term or Pratyahara for the
consonants ङ्क, शु, and न. See इ (3).
डमुद् augment डम् i. e. ड्, ण् or न
prefixed to a vowel at the beginn-
ing of a word provided that vowel
is preceded by ड, ण् or न standing
at the end of the preceding word.
See ङ्क (3).
डस् ending of the genitive case sing-
ular: स्य is substituted for डट् after
bases ending in अ: cf P. IV l . 2
and VII. 1. 12.
डस्सि case-ending of the ablative
case, changed into अात् after bases
ending in अ and into स्मात् after
pronouns; cf.P.IV.1.2,VII.1.12,15.
डि case-ending of the locative case,
changed into (a) अाम् after bases
termed Nad,fem. bases ending in अा
and the word नी, (b) into औ after
bases ending in इ and उ, and (c)
into स्मिन् after bases of pronounscf

डित् _ 138 , च्
P.TV. 1. 2, VII. 3. 116, 117, 118, | words headed by गौर, as also to
I 19 and VII. 1. 15, 16. noun bases ending in affixes
fडत् (l) affixes with the mute letter marked with.mute शु, as also to
, ङ्क attached to them either before words mentioned in the class
or after, with a view to preventing headed by बहुः cf. P.iv.1.4-46.It
the guna and vrddhi substitutes is also added in the sense of " wife
for the preceding इ, उ, ऋ, or of ' to any word denoting a male
ल, as for example, the affixes person: cf. P. IV. ]. 48, and
चङ्क, अङ्क and others (2) affixes con- together with the augment आनुक्
ventionally called डित् after certain (आन्) to the words इन्द्र, वरुणetce.g.
bases under certain conditions | इन्द्राणी वर्णन ,्नान ganing the
cf. गाङ्कुटादिभ्ये ञ्णिन्ङित् P. I. 2. 1-4; script of the Yavanas ， cf. P. IV.
(3) 68 maked with the mut6 | |-?- It is also added to wºrds
letter ड् signifying the application ending in क्रीत and words ending
* of the Atmanepada terminations to in ， and also tol.words.expressive
them: (4) substitutes marked with | 9 * }in95 %.the P9dy' dgr
mute ङ्क which are put in the place certain conditions: cf. P. IV. 1.
of the last letter of the word for 50-59 and IV. 1.61--65.
which they are prescribed as sub-| ड्टर् augment इ mentioned as ङ्कट्, in
* stitutes; (5) case affixes marked Kasika, added to the vowel follow-
with mute letter ड् which cause the ing the consonant ङ्क at the end of
substitution of guna to the last a word. See डमुट्.
vowel इ or उ of words termed वि-| डे dative case termination changed .
ड common term for the fem. affix ई, into य after bases ending in short
mentioned as डपु, डीषु or डीन् by अ and into ，ने after pronouns cf.
Panini; cf P. IV. I. 5-8; IV. 1. P. IV. 1.2, VII. 1.13, 14.
I5-39, 40-65 and IW. 1. 73. | डयन्त noun bases ending with the
डींन् fem. affix ई added to words in fem. affix डी ( डीप्, डय्, or डन् ): cf.
the class headed by इाङ्गरव: cf. P. | डयन्तादित्येवं भविष्यति M.Bh. on P. I..
IV. 1. 73. Words ending with this | 1.89 Vart. 16.
afix डीन have their first vowel | डद्यप्पाद् a popular name given by
accented acute. grammarians to the first pada of
डीप् fem. affix ई which is anudatta the fourth adhyaya of Panini's
(grave) added (a) to words ending Astadhyay as the pda begins
# thevowel ऋ' 6r the consona| with the rule ब्याप्प्रातिपदिकात् !V:
न्(cf.PIV.1.5), (b) to words ending | ** _
' with af् !arked with mute उ, ऋ | |्वनिप् krt affix वन् in the sense of
9r ल: :P!Wl.6,(c) to words end-| " an agent referring to an activity
ing wth afies marked with mute | of past time, added to the roots सु
ट् as also ending with the affixes ढ, and यज्; e. g. सुत्वा, सुत्वानैौ;यज्वा यज्वानौ
अणु,अञ्ज,द्वयसच् दनड्,मात्रज्ञ,तयप्,ठक्,ठञ्, cf. P. III 2.103.
क् and करम् (cf P.IV.1.15) and to
certain other words under certain
conditions cf. P. IV. 1.16-24, सिचत्र
ङीष् fm. afix ई,. which is udatta, च first consonant of the palatal
PPPicd to words in the class of class of consonans, posssed of

139
चङ्कगुदास
the properties, श्वास, अधेष, अल्पप्राण | वक्नइाम a grammarian who is said
and कण्ठविवृतत्व. व् at the beginning
of an affix is mute e. g. स्फढ, cf.
बुद्ध P. I. 3.7; words, having the
mute letter वृ (dropped), have
their last vowel accented acute
e. g. भङ्गुरम् ) भासुरम् [ cf. चित: VI.
1.163.
च (l) the letter , the vowel अ
being added for facility of utter-
ance, cf T. Pr. I. 21: (2) a Bra-
tyahara or short term standing
for the palatal class of consonants
ज्ञ, इ, ज्ञ,इ and ब् ; cf इन्च्यास्ताले V.
Pr. I. 66 (3) indeclinable च call-
ed Nipata by Panini: cf. चाद्यीSसत्वे
P. I. 4.57, च possesses four senses
समुच्चय, अन्वाचय, इतरेतरयोग and समाहृार
cf. Kas. on II. 2.29. See also
M. Bh. on II. 2.29 Vart. 15 for a
detailed explanation of the four
' senses. The indeclinable च is
sometimes used in the sense of
*a determined mention' or ava-
dharana: cf Kas. on II. 1.48 and
72. It is also used for the pur-
pose of अनुवृत्ति or अनुकर्षण i, e.
, drawing a word from the previous
, rule to the next rule; (cf. M. Bh.
on P. VI. 1.90) with a convention
that a word drawn thus, does not
proceed to the mext rule;	cf.
चानुकृष्टं नोत्तरत्र Par. Sek Pari. 78; (4)
a conventional term for अभ्यास
(reduplicative syllable) used in
the Jainendra Vyakarana; cf.
चविकारेषु अपवादा उत्सर्गान्न बाधन्ते Kat.
, Pari. 75. _
चकार the consonant च् , the vowel अ
. being added for facility of utter-
ance and कार as an affix to show
that only the consonant व is
meant there; cf. T. Pr. I. 16, 2l.
चंकीर a grammarian who .wrote a
commentary on the * Sabdalii-
... garthacandrika of Sujanapandita.| .
to have written a work named
Dhatusarhgraha.
चक्रक a kind of fault in the appli-
cation of operations, resulting in
confusion; a fault in which one
returns to the same place not
immediately as in Amavasth but
after several steps: cf. पुनर्कच्छिभावः
पुनराट् इति चक्रकृमुव्यवस्था प्रमेति	M.
Bh. on I. 3.60 Vart 5.
चक्रकरक known by the name कारक-
चक्र also, a small work on syntax
attributed to वररुचि.
चक्रपाणे ( शेष ) a grammarian of
the Sesa family of the latter half
of the 17th century who held
views against Bhattoj Diksita
and wrote प्रौढमनोरमाखेण्डन, कारकतत्व
and कारकद्वित्वार..
चक्रिन् a grammarian who has
written a small disquisition on "
the correctness of the form जाग्रहृीता.
See जाग्रहीतेातवाद्.
वङ्क a Vikarana affix of the aorist
substituted for च्लि after roots
ending in the causal sign णि, as
also after the roots श्रि, दु and
others thisवङ्क causes reduplication
of the preceding root form; cf. P.
III 1.48-50, e. g. अचूचुरत्, अशिश्रियत्:
cf. also P. WII. 4.93.
चङ्गदास a grammarian who has
written a work on the topic of
the five vpttis. The work is named
चङ्गवृति.
चङ्गवृत a short treatise written by
वङ्गदास, dealing with the topic of
, the five compact expressionsor
Vrttis viz. कृत्, तद्वित, समास, एकोष,
and सनादिघातु. -
वङ्कगुदास or चाड्गुद्ास्त a scholar of
ºrammar whohas written an inde-
pendent work on SanskritVyaka-
ianacalled वैयाकरणजीवाद्व. Thetrea-

चण् 140 चय्
tise is also known as च्वाड्गुसूत्र or | टि, बु are found. There is no
वइगु-्याकरण.
चण् the indeclinable च (with ण् as a
mute letter added to it which
of course disappears) possessing
the sense ofवत् or condition. e. g.
अये च मरिष्यति cf. Ks, on P. VIHI.
1.30.
चणप् tad. affix चण in the sense of
वित्त (known by) applied to a word
which refers to that thing by which
a person is known. e. g. विद्याचणः,
कइाचणः; cf. P. V. 2.26.
चण्डपाडित writer of a Prakrta gram-
mar.He was known also as चन्द्र and
hence identified by some with
Candragomin.
a term used by ancient gram-
marians for the fourth consonants
which are sonant aspirates, termed
इष् by Panini; cf. R. Pr. IV. 2. T.
Pr. I. 18, V. Pr. 154. R. T. 176.
वतुथीं a term used by ancient gra-
mmarians for the dative case;
cf. उतो त्वस्मै तन्वं विसखे इति चतुथ्र्याम्:
Nir. I. 9.8.
चतुर्थीसमास the tatpurusa compound
with the first word in the dative
case in its dissolution; cf. वतुर्थीसमासे
सति पूर्वपदकृतिस्वरत्वेन भवितव्यम् M. Bh.
on II. 1.36.
चतुर्मात्र consisting of four mitras or
moras, a short vowel consisting
of one matra, a long vowel of two
matras, and a protracted vowel of
three matras; cf. आन्तर्यतस्त्रिमात्र-
चतुर्मात्राणां स्थानिनां त्रिमात्रचतुर्मात्रा अदृक्षा
मा भूवन्निति / M. Bh. on Siva sutra
3.4.
वन्द्र a famous Buddhist Sanskrit
grammarian whose grammar
existing in the Tibetan script,
is now available in the Devana-
gar script. The work consists of
six chapters or Adhyayas in which
* no technical terms or sarhjfas like
section on Vedic Grammar and
accents. The work is based on
Pahini's grammar and is believed
to have been written by Candra
or Candragomin in the 5th cen-
tnry A. D. Bhartrhari in his
Vakyapadya refers to him: cf.
स नीतो बहुशाखत्वं चन्द्राचार्यादिभिः पुनः
Vakyapadiya II. 489. A summary
gf thc work is found in the Agni-
purana, ch. 448-258.
चन्द्रकला, called also कला, a well-
known commentary on Nagesa's
Laghusabdendusekhara by Bhai-
ravamiSra who lived in the lattcr
half of the I8th century and the
firsthalfof the nineteenth century.
चन्द्रकीर्ति a Jain grammarian of the
twelfth century A.D. who has
written a commentary named
Subodhini on the Sarasvata Vya-
karaha. _
चन्द्रगोमिन् named also चन्द्र, a Bud-
dhist scholar who has written an
easy Sanskrit Grammar based on
the Astadhyayi of Panini. He is
believed to have lived in North
India in the fifth century A.D.
See न्वन्द्र.
चन्द्राचार्य a grammarian mentioned
by Bhartrhari in his Vakyapadya
as one who took a leading part in
restoring the traditional explana-
tion of Panini's Vyakarana which,
by the spread of rival easy trea-
tises om grammar, had become
almost lost: cf. यः पतञ्जालशिष्येभ्यो भ्रष्टो
ब्याकरणागमः काले स दाक्षिणात्येषु ग्रन्थमात्रे
व्यवास्थत: । पर्वतादागमं लब्ध्वा भाष्येबीजानुसा-
रािभः | स नीतो बहुशाखत्वं चन्द्रान्वार्यादिभि:
पुनः ( Vakyapadya II. 488-489.
See चन्द्र and चन्द्रगोमिन्. _
चवय् a short term (Pratyahara) for
the first letters ( क् , च् , ट् त्, and प्र)
of the five classes. Sometimes as

चर्
141
वचो
opined by पौष्करसादि, second letters ;
are substituted for these if a sibi- ;
lant follows them, e. g,
असर्, ;
वथ्सर:	cf. चये द्वितीयाः द्वारि पीप्क्ररसाद् ;
रिति वाच्यम् cf. S.K. on इणोः कुक्टुक् दरि !
P, VIII.3.28.
चर् a short term (PratyBhara) for the
hard unaspirated surds and ढ, बु,
सू- The change of the second, third !
and fourth letters into the first is
called चत्र्व: cf. अभ्यासे चर्च ! खरि !
च " वावसान | Pan. VIII.4.54-56.
च्ले़ tad. affix चर in tne sense of ;
'being (so and so) in the past'.
98ः गुढच्र्:, fem. आद्यचरी: cf. भूतपूर्वे
चरट् P.V.3.53.
नरण explained as a synonym of the
word शाखा which means a branch or
a school ofVedic Learning: cf. चरण-
राब्दाः क्रठकलापाद्य: Ks. on P.IV.2.46.
चरितक्रिय having kriya or verb-
activity hidden in it. The terna
is used by Bhartrhari in connec-
tion with a solitary noun-word or
a substantive having the force of a
sentence, and hence which can be
termed a sentence on account of
the verbal activity dormant in it.
e.g. पिण्डीम्: cf. वाक्यं तदपि मन्यन्ते यत्पदं
वरिताक्रयम् Vakyapad.II. 326, and
त्वरिता गर्भाकृता आख्यातक्रिया यस्य तद्भकृतक्रि-
यापदं नामपदं वाक्यं प्रयुञ्जते ! Com. on
Vakyapadya II.326.
चरितार्थ which has got already a
scope of application; the term is
used by commentators in connec-
tion with a rule or a word forming
a part of a rule which applies in
the case of some instances and
hence which cannot be said to be
ब्यर्थ (superfluous) or without any |
utility and as a result cannot be
said to be capable ofallowing some
conclusion to be drawn from it ac-
cording to the dictum ब्यर्थं सज्ज्ञापयति |
cf. . अपवादे , यद्यन्यत्र चरितार्थस्तह्यन्तरङ्गण
बाध्यत Par. Sek. Pari. 65. -
चर्करीत a term used by the ancient
grammarians in connection with a
secondary root in the sense of
frequency; the term यड्ढगन्त is used
by comparatively modern gramm-
arians in the same sense. The वर्क-
रीत roots are treated as roots of the
adadi class or second conjugation
and hence the general Vikarana
अ ( बापू ) is omitted after them.The
word is based on the 3rd pers.
sing form चर्करीति from .the root कृ
in the sense of frequency; e.g.
चर्करीति, चर्कर्ति, बोभवीति बोभेति: cf. न्वर्क-
रीतं च a gana-sitra in the gana
named fadadi given by Panini in
connection with अदिप्रभृतिभ्यः शप:
Pan. II.4.72; cf. also चर्करीतमिति
यङ्कटुकः प्राचां संज्ञा Bh∂ Vr. on P. II.
4.72, The word वक्रीयित is sirni-
larly used for the frequentative
when the sign of the frequen-
tative viz. य ( यङ्ग् ) is not elided.
Seeवक्रीयेत.
चर्करीतदृत a form of the frequenta-
tive or intensive. e.g. अापनीफणत् ,
चोष्कूयमाणः	cf. अपनीफणादेति फणतंश्री-
तवृत्तम् | Nir. II. 28; चोष्कूयमाण इति
वेष्कूयतश्चर्करीतवृत्तम् Nir.VI.22. See the
word चर्करी
चर्चा (1) splitting up of a word into
its component parts, which is gen-
eralty shown in the Padaptha by
अवग्रहं (S). The word, hence means
पदपाठ or recital by showing separa-
tely the constitutent words of the
Sarimhita or the running text of the
Weda. The word is used almost in.
the same sense in the Mahabhgya
in respect of showing the words of
a suitra separately; cf. न केवलानि
चर्चापदानि व्याख्यानं वृद्धिः आत् एजति |
किं तर्हि । उदाहृरणं प्रत्युदाहृरणं वाक्याध्याहृार:
इत्येतत्समुदितं व्याख्यानं भवति M.Bh. on
Mahesvara Sutra l Wart. 6l ; (2) a
_

वचर्यागुण
142
चाप्
repeated word cf. इतिकरणात् पुरती यत्
पुनः पदवचनं तत् चत्र्वाशब्देनोच्यते. Uvvata
on W. Pr. III.20; (3) a discussion
or a debate where consideration is
given to each single word: cf.
प्रर्यायशब्दानां लाघवगौरववर्चो नाद्रियते Par.
Sek. Pari. ! 15.
चचौगुण repetition of a word in the
पद्पाठ, क्रमपाठ, जटापाठ etc. where the
several Pathas appear to be called
चच.In theपदपाठ aword in a comp-
ound is repeated twice, in the
क्रमपाठ every word is repeated twice,
in the जटापाठ, six times.
चंचोपद् component words of a runn-
ing text or of a compound word.
चत्र्वे substitution of a hard consonant
or इ, इ, स्, for soft consonants and
aspirates. See the word चर्.
चर्मईिरस् name of a Nirukta writer
guoted by Yaska; cf. Nir.III.15.
चवगे the group of consonants of the
palatal class,.wiz. बु, , जु, इ and बु.
The word च is used in the same
' sense in the Prtisakhya works.See
, the word च.
चाक्रवमेण an ancient grammarian
, whose viey is quoted by Panini in
his Sitra ई 3 चाक्रवर्मणस्य P.VI.1.180.
चङ्कयुदास the same as चङ्क or चङ्क or
वड्णुदास,a grammarian who compo-
sed a compendium on grammar
called वैयाकरणजीवातु and alsº a com-
mentary on it,
च्वाङ्गण्स्रत्र a treatise on the grammar
Written by चाडगुदास in the Stra
form,which was named वैयाकरणजीवातु
by him.
च्वाड्ढव्याकरण the same as वाङ्गसञ्ज.
Veb
चातुःस्वार्य the wiew that there are
four accents-the udatta, the
anudatta, the svarita and the
, Pragaya-ºhgld by the Khºrdikya
, and the Aukhiya Schools.
खातुरथे a tad- affix prescribed in the
four senses-तदस्मिन्नस्ति, तेन निवृत्तम् ,
तस्य निवासः and अदूरभवः mentioneनं
by Paini in IV.2.67-70; cf.अपत्यादि-
भ्यश्चातुरर्थपर्यन्तेभ्यः येन्येर्थाः स ईब: M.BH.
on IV.2.92.
चातुरर्थिक the affixes prescribed in
the four senses mentioned in P.
IV.2.67-70. These taddhita affixes
are given in the Stras IV.2.71 to
IV.2.91. The term चातुरर्थिक् is
used for these afixes by commen-
tators on Panini suitras.
वाढर्वण्यदि words mentioned in the
class headed by चातुर्वण्र्य where the
tad. affix ष्यङ् is applied although
the words चतुर्वर्ण, चतुर्वेद and others
are not गुणवचन words to which
यद् is regularly applied by P.
Y-1-124. cf. ब्राह्मणादिषु चेातुर्वण्र्यादीनामुप-
संख्यानम् P. V. I. 124 Vºt. 1.
चादि a class of words headed by च
which are termed निपात by Pini
e g- च,वा, दृ, एवम् नूनम्, वत्, माङ्क
etc.; cf. चदयोSस्व.	P. I.4.57. For
the meaning of the word असत्त्व see
p.370 Vyakaranamahabhagya. Vol.
VII. published by the D. E.
Society, Poona.
च्वान् k!t affix अान applied to a root,
to signify habit, age or strength;
e. g. आत्मानं भूषयमाणाः | कवश्वं विभ्राणाः |
शञ्जिघ्नाना: cf. P. III. 2. 129.
च्¶ ame of a treatise on grammar
written by Candra, who is believed
to have been the same as Can-
dragomin The Grammar is based
upon that of Panini, but it does
not treat Vedic forms and accents.
See the word चन्द्र above. For
details see pp. 375- 376 Patajali
Mahabhsya. Vol. VII, D.TE.
Society's Edition.
चान्द्रव्याकरणपद्धात name of a con-
mentary on the चान्द्रव्याकरण written
by अानन्ददत. _
प्नार् the fem. affix आ, applied , to

चारायण
143
चिन्तामणि
' words ending in the tad. afixes
, दूइ and ष्यङ्क: e. g. कौसल्या, वाराह्या,
' गौकक्ष्या: cf Kas, on P. TV. 1. 74.
ग्रॅयण an ancient grammarian re-
ferred to by Pataijali in the Ma-
hbhsya as a scholar who had a
line of pupils named after him;
सूर्यः M. Bh. on P. I.
चारिताथ्र्य fulHIment of the object or
the Purpose. The word is ised in
Sonnection with a rule of grammar.
See चरितार्थ.
the meaning of the indeclinable
द्!9 convey which, as existing in
different individuals, the dvanda
9onaPound is prescribed.Out of the
fºr senses possessed by the inde
clinable च, the Dvafidva	com-
' P9und is prescribed in two senses
yiz..इतरेतरयोग and समाहृार out of hº
four समुचय, अन्वाचय, इतरेतरयोग and
ूमादार: cf क्ः पुनश्चेन कृतेर्थः समुच्चय-
नेवाचय इतरेतरयेगः समाहृार इति M. B,.
9n P II.2.29; cf also Candra
Vyakarana II.2.48.
लाड tad. affix ( आबु ) applied to the
word हृदय, in the sense of posses-
sion optionally along with the
afixes वत् इन् and इक. e.g. हृदयालुः,
हृदयवान् , हृदयी and हृदयिक्रः: cf. K:
on V.2. 122.
चिर्कर्षित desiderative formation: a
term used by ancient grammarians
for the term सञ्जन्त of Panini on the
analogy of the terms भबन्ती, वर्तमाना
" gtc. cf अा इत्याकांर उपसर्गः पुरस्तत्, चिर्को-
उत्तर:, अासु शेन्वयतीतिं आशुशुक्षाणः
Nir. VI. 1.
विकीर्षितज in the sense of the
desiderative; cf. चिकीर्षितादर्थोज्ज्ञात:
सन्नन्तादित्यर्थः Durgacarya on Nir.
WI.1.
चिच्चन्द्रिका name of a commentary
on the Paribhasendusekhara writ-
ren by Vishnu Shastri Bhat, in
reply to the treatise named दूकरदी-
द्वद. See विष्णुर्दात्रन्. For details see
pp. 39, 40 of Vyakarana Mahर्वे-
bhasya Vol. VII. published by
the D.E. Society, Poona.
चिण् substitute इ causing wrddhi, in
the place of the aorist vikaraha
affix चिल, prescribed in the case of
all roots in the passive voice and
in the case of the roots पद्, दीप्, जन्
etc. in the active voice before the
affix त of the third pers. sing. in
the Atmanepada, which in its
turn is elided by P. VI. 4. 104.
cf P. III. 1.60-66.
चित् affixes or substitutes or bases
marked with the mute letter ， sig-
nifying the acute accent for the
last vowel; e. g. अधुच्, धुरव, कुाडनक्
etc. cf P. VI. 1. 163, 164.
चित्करण marking with the mute letter
च्, signifying the acute accent of
the last vowel; cf. चापि चित्करणसाम-
थ्र्यादन्तेोदात्तत्वं भविष्यति: M. Bh. on P.
III. 1.3 Vart, 16. _
चित्प्रभा name of a commentary
on the Paribhasendusekhara by
ब्रह्मानन्दसरस्वती.
चिदस्थिमाला name of a commentary
on the Laghusabdendusekhara by
Vaidyanatha Payagunde,ome of the
distinguished disciples of Nagesa-
bhatta.
चिदूपाश्रय named also चिदूपाश्रम who
wrote a learned commentary
named विषमी on the Paribhgen-
dusekhara of Nagesabhatta
चिन्ता (1) view theory e.g. बाध्यसामान्य-
चिन्ता, बाध्यावेर्दोषचिन्ता _cf. इयमेव बाध्य-
सामान्याचिन्तेति व्यबाहुयत Par. Sek. Pari.
58; (2) a matter of scrutiny on a
suspicion; cf. चिन्ता व-मयतरिदन्य-
तरस्याम् इत्यतेन्यतरस्यांग्रहृणस्य सिंह्यावलेीकन-
न्यायादनुतः Durghata Vr. on VI.4.69.
चिन्तामणि name of a commentary

चिन्तामणिप्रकाा्ीका
on the Sutras of the Sakatyana
Vyakarana written by यक्षवर्मन्, It is
also called लधुवृत्ति.
चिन्तामणिप्रकाढिाका a commentary on
the चिन्तामाणि of य्क्षत्रमैन्, written by
अाजतसन in the twelfth century. See
विन्तामणि.
चिन्त्य Guestionable contestable:
which cannot be easily admitted.
The word is used in connection
with a statement made by a sound
scholar which cannot be easily
brushed aside; cf. एतन यत्कैयट केाच-
दित्यादिना अस्यैव वाग्रहृणस्य , तदनित्यत्वज्ञाप-
" क्रतोक्ता सापि चिन्त्या, Par. Sekh. Pari.
93. 5.
बु the group of palatal consonants
viM. इ, इ, ज्, इ， and ऋ: cf बुद्ध P.
I. 3. 7, चोः कुः WIII. 2. 30, कुहेोश्च:
VII. 4 62.
बुब्बुप् tad.. affix खञ्ज applied to a
word in the sense of * well-known
by P: e. g. विद्याबुच्चुः: cf. P, W. 2. 26.
a class or group of roots
headed by the root बुर्, familiarly
known as the tenth conjugation.
बुळिभा a grammarian who is suppo-
sed to have written a gloss ( वृत्ति )
on the Stras of Panini: cf. तत्र च
वृतिः पाणिनिप्रणीतानां सूत्राणां विवरणं बुछभढि-
नेल्ट्रादि- ( V. 1. निरादि-} विरचितम् ,
Nyasa, on the benedictory verse of
Kikः वृत्तौ भाष्य तथा घातुनामपारायणा-
दिषु at the very beginning.
चूर्ण a gloss on the Sitras ofPanini
referred to by Itsing and Sripati-
datta, Some scholars believe that
Patajali's Mahabhsya is referred
to here by the word कूर्णि, as it fully
discusses all the knotty points.
Others believe that चूर्णि,stands for
the Vrtti ofबुा्भद्वि. In Jain Reli-
* gious Literature there are some
briefcomments on the Sitras which
are called तूर्णि and there possibly
144
_<
चारद्
was a similar चूर्ण on the sutras of
Panini.
चेक्रीयित the sign य ( यङ्क of Panini )
of the frequentative or intensive.
The word is mostly used in the
Katantra Grammar works cf.
धातेर्यज्ञाब्दश्चक्रीयेतं क्रियासमभिहार, Kat.
III. 2. 14. The wordचक्रीयित is used
in the Mahabhasya in the sense of
यइत where Kaiyata remarks थड:
पूर्वावायेसंज्ञा चक्रीयितमिति cf. प्रदीप on
M.Bh. on P. IV.1.78 Vartika. The
' word चक्रीयितमिन्त means यडन्त in
Paninis terminology meaning a
secondary root derived from the
primary root in the sense of in-
tensity. The word चर्करीतान्त is used
for the frequentative bases in which
य, the sign of the frequentative, is
_
Omitted. See -
चेलु tad. affix एडु applied to the word
हिंम in the sense of * unable to
bear * e. g, हृिमेलु:, cf. P. V. 2. 122
Vart. 7.
चोकनाथ a southern grammarian of
the seventeenth century who has
composed in 430 stan2as a short
list of the important roots with
their meaning. The work is called
धातुरत्नावली.
चीद्क (1) an objector; the word is co-
mmon in the Commentary Litera- ?
ture where likely objections to a
particular statement are raised,
without specific reference to any
individual objector, and replies are
given, simply with a view to mak-
ing matters clear; (2) repetition
of a word with इति interposed: cf.
चेदकः परिग्रहः इत्यनर्थान्तरम्. See अदृष्टवर्ण
and थरिग्रहृ.
चोरद् the crude form of the word वेर
with the mute consonant ट् added
to signify the addition of डीप् to
form the feminine base e. g. चैौरी;
cf. P. IV. 1. 15.

चोराद्विक
145
छप्
चोरादिक a root belonging to the tenth
conjugation of roots ( चुरादिगण ) ; cf.
अामः इति चौरादिकस्य णिचि वृद्धौ सत्यां भवति |
Kas. on P. VII. 8. 34.
the consonant छ with व् prfiexed,
for which ् is substituted by कृताः
शूडनुनासिके च P. VI. 4. 19.
च्फञ् tad. affix अायन causing a vrddhi
substitute for the first vowel of the
word to which it is added, The
affix ( च्फञ्ज ) is added in the sense
of * a descendant except the direct
son or daughter to words कुञ्ज and
others, cf. P. IV. I. 98.
चिल the sign of the aorist ( लुड् ) for
which generally सिच् and अङ्क, स, चङ्क
and चिण् are substituted in specified
cases; cf. P. III. 1. 43-66.
चव tad. affix ( of which nothing re-
mains ) to signify the taking place
of something which was not so
before: after the word ending in
वि the forms of the root क्, भू or
असू have to be placed; e. g. शुक्री-
करोति: cf. P. V. 4. 50
च्व्यर्थे possessing the sense of वि. See
चिव cf. P. III. 2. 56 also P. III.
3. 127 Vart. 1.
छ
ऋ the second consonant of the
palatal class of consonants ( चवर्ग ),
which is possessed of the properties
श्वास, अधेष, मह्याप्राण and कण्ठविवृतकारित्व.
च् , placed at the beginning of
affixes, is mute; while ईय् is substi-
tuted for छ standing at the begi-
nning of taddhita affixes; cf. P. I.
3.7 and VII. 1.2. ट् at the end
of roots has got ， substituted for
it: cf. P. VIII. 2.36.
छ tad. affix ईय, added ( 1 ) to the
words स्वरुढ, भ्रातृ and to words end-
ing with the tad. affix फिशू: cf. P.
19 . _
IV. 1.143,144 and 149: (2) to the
dvandva compound of words
meaning constellations,to the words
अपेनमृ, अपांनप्तृ, महेन्द्र, द्यावापृथिवी, हुनासीर
etc. as also to इार्करा, उत्कर् , नड etc. in
certain specified senses, cf. P. IV.
2.6, 28, 29, 32, 48, 84, 90 &91 ;(3)
to words beginning with the vowel
called Vrddhi (आ,ए or औ),to words
ending with गर्त, to words of the
गहृ class, and to युष्मद् and अस्मद् in
the ?ोबिक्र senses, cf. P. IV. 3.1 14,
137-45 and IV. 3.1 ; (4) to the
words जिह्वामूल, अङ्गुलि, as also to
words ending in वर्ग in the sense of
* present there '; cf. P.IV.3.62-64;
(5) to the words शिशुक्रन्द, यमसभ,
dvandva compounds, इन्द्रजनन and
others in the sense of * a book
composed in respect of', cf. P.IV.
3.88; (6)to words meaning warrior
tribes, to words रैवतिक etc, as also
अायुघ, and अग्र, in some specifi-
ed senses: cf P.IV. 3.91, 131, IV.
4.14, 117; (7) to all words barring
those given as exceptions in the
general senses mentioned in the
sec. V.I.1-37; (8) to the words पुत्र,
कडङ्कर, दाक्षण, words ending in वत्सर,
अनुप्रवचन etc. हेोत्रा, अभ्यमित्र and कुहाग्र
in specified senses; cf. P. V. 1. 40,
69,70,91,92, 111,112,135, V. 2.17,
V.3.105; (9) to compound words
in the sense of इव : e. g. काकतालीयम् ,
अजाकृपाणीयम् etc. cf. V. 3. 106;and
(10) to words ending in जति and
स्थान in specified senses; cf. P. V.4,
9,10. -
छकार the letter छ, the word क्रार being
looked upon as an affix added
to the consonant च् which, by the
addition of अ, is made a complete
syllable; cf. T. Pr. I. 16, 21.
छण् tad. affix ईय causing the vrddhi
substitute for the first vowel of the
word to which it is added. छणु is
added (1) to the words पितृष्वस्र and

छन्द्स्
मातृष्वसुः in the sense of अपत्य: cf. P
IV. 1.132, 134; (2) to the word?
कृशाश्व,अरिष्ट and others as a चातुरर्थिक
affix: cf. P. IV. 2.80; (3) to the
words तित्तिरि, वरतन्तु, खण्डिक and उख
in the sense of finstructed by', cf.
P.IV.3.102; and (4) to the word
इलातुर in the sense of *being a
national of or *having as a domi-
cile.' e. g. झालातुरीय:: cf. P. IV. 3.94,
छन्द्स् (1) Vedic Literature in general
as found in the rule बहुलं छन्दसि
which has occurred several times
in the Stºtr्s of Panini, cf. छन्दंी-
वत्सूत्राणि भवन्ति M. Bh. on I.1.1, and
I.4.3; cf. also V. Pr. I. 1, 4; (2)
Vedic Sarmhita texts as contrasted
with the Brahmana texts; cf. छन्दंी-
ब्राह्मणानि च तद्विषयाणि P, IV.2.66; ()
metre, metrical portion of the
Veda.
छन्दंीभाषा Vedic language as contrast-
ed with भाषा (ordinary language in
use); cf. , गुरुत्वं बुद्वा साम्यं हृस्वदीर्घप्लुतानि
च...एतत्सर्वं तु ज्ञेयं छन्दंीभाषां धिजेनित
T. Pr. XXIV. 5.
छपाद a popular name given by gra-
mmarians to the first pada of the
fifth Adhyaya of Painis As.
dhyay as the pada begins with
the rule प्राक् क्रीताच्छ: P. V. 1.1.
a short term or Pratyahara stand-
ing for _ श्, च् , ट् and त्: cf.
नश्छव्यप्रदान् P. VIII.3.7.
छस् tad. affix ईय added to the word
भवत् in the general ईषिक senses,
e. g. भवदीयः: cf P. IV.2.115. TH8
mute letter q has been attached to
ths affix छस् So that the base भवत्
before it could be termed pada
(cf. सिते च P, I.4.16) and as a
result have the consonant त् chang-
ed into द् by P. VIII.2.39.
छान्दस found in the VedicLiterature:
Vedic:_cf छान्दस्रा अपि कश्चिद् भाषायां
146
प्रयुज्यन्ते Bhavrtti on P. IV.'4.48ः ]
जग नाथ
cf. also छान्दसमंतत् | दृष्टानुविधिश्च च्छन्दसि
भवति: M. Bh. on I.1.5.
छाया a learned commentary on Na-
geSa's Mahabhasyapradipoddyota
written by his pupil बाळभइ (possibly
the sameas, or the son of, वैद्यनाथे
पायगुण्ड) who lived in the eighteenth
century.
कुच्चुकभइ a grammarian who wrote
a short gloss called कातन्त्रलबुद्धाति on
the Katantrastras.
उन
ज third consonant of the palatal class
of consonants, possessed of the
properties नाद, घीघ, अल्पप्राण and कण्ठ-
संवृतकारित्व. ज् at the beginning of
affixes is mute in Panini's grammar.
ज the consonant ज् with अ added to
it for facility of pronunciation; cf.
T. Pr. I..21. See जु.
जगद्धर a poet and grammarian of
Kasmira of the fourteenth century
who wrote a commentary named
बाळबोधिनी on.the Ktantra Sitras.
जगन्नाथ (1) the well-known poet and
scholar of Vyakarana and Alarh-
kra who wrote many excellent
poetical works. Hc liyed in the
sixteenth century. He was a pupil
of कृष्णशेष and he severely criticised
the views of Appaya Diksita and
Bhattoj Diksita. He wrote a sort
of refutation of Bhattoji's commen-
tary Praudha-Manoram on the
Siddhānta Kaumudi, which he
named प्रौढमनेारमाखण्डन but which is
popularly termed मनोरमाकुचमर्दन. His
famous work is the Rasagafg-
dhara on Alahkrasastra; (2)
writer of a commentary on the
" Rk-Pratisºkhya by name Varna-
kramalaksana; (3) writer of Sara-
pradipika, a commentary on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana. _

जटा
147 जहृत्स्वार्थौ
जदु a kind of Vedic recital wherein
each word is repeated six times.
जटा is called one of the 8 kinds
( अष्टविकृति) of the Kramapatha,
which in its turn is based on the
Padapha; cf. जटा माला झिखा रेखा
ध्बजे दण्डो रथे घनः , अष्टौ बिकृतये: प्रोक्ताः
क्रमपूर्वा मनीषिभिः | जटा is defined as
अनुलेोमविलोमाभ्यां त्रिवारं हि पठत् क्रमम् |
विलोमे पदवत्संधिः अनुलोमे यथाक्रमम् | The
recital of ओषधयः संबदन्त समन can be
illustrated as ओषधय्: सं, समीषधय:,
ओषधयः सं, सं वदन्त, बद्न्त से, सेवदन्ते,
वदन्ते सोमेन, संमैन वदन्त, वदन्ते सोमेन |
जयछष्ण a famous grammarian of the
Mauni family who lived in Vara-
nas in the seventeenth century.
He wrote विभक्त्यर्थनिर्णय, स्फोटवान्द्रका, a
commentary on the Siddhanta-
kaumud called सुबोधिनी and a
commentary on the Madhya Kau-
mud named विलास. He wrote a |:
commentary on the Laghukau-
mudi also.
_ - _!
जयदंव a grammarian, ( of course
well-known !
- different from the
poet), to whom a small treatise on
grammar by name इष्टतन्त्रव्याकरण is
attributed.
जयन्त (1) author of तक्वचन्द्र a commen-
tary on पाणिनिसूत्रवृत्ति written by
Vitthala; (2) writer of a commen-
tary named Vaidighatamudgara on
the Sirasvataprakriy.
a famous Bengalee
scholar of Vyakarana and Nyaya
who has written a small treatise
, dealing with syntax. The treatise
is named कारकवाद.
जयादित्य one of the famous joint
authors ( जयादित्य and वामन ) of the
weli-known gloss ( वृत्त ) on the
Sण्tras of Panini, popularly called
. As the काशिकावृत्ति is men-
tioned by It-sing, who has also
mentioned Bhartpharis Vakya-
padya, as a grammar treatise
Written some 40 years before his
visit, the time of काङ्क्रिाइति is fixed
as the middle of the 7th century
A.D. Some scholars believe that
जयदित्य was the same as जयापीड a
king of Kasmira and बामन was his
minister. For details, see pp. 386-
388 of the Vyakarana Mahabhasya
Vol. VII published by the D.E.
Society, Poona. See कार्ङ्मक्र-
जयानन्द् a.Jain grammarian of the
fourteenth century who wrote a
commentary ramed उद्धार on the
लिङ्गानुशासन of Hemacandra
ज् a short term ( प्रत्याहृतार ) signifying
the soft inaspirate class consonants
जु, ब्, ग्, ड् and द्-
जरत्व substitution of a ज consonant
prescribed by Prini for any con-
sonant excepting a semi-vowel or
a nasal, if followed by any fourth
or third consonant out of the class
consonants, or if it is at the end of
a pada: cf. P.VIII. 2.39, VIII.4.
53.
जदभाव the same as जन्त्व, which see
above. -
जस् case termination अस् ol the nom.
plural: cf.P. IV. 1.2.
जासे case termination असु of the
nom. plural mentioned as जस्र by
Prini in IV. 1.2, but referred to
as जसि by him: cf. P.IV.1.3d and
VII.1.50.
जहृत्स्वाथो ( वृत्त ) a composite ex-
pression where the constituent
inembers give up their individual
sense. In compound words such
as राजपुरुष in the sentence राजपुरुषमा-
नय the word राजन् gives up its
sense inasmuch as he the king,-
is not brought; पुरुष also gives up
its sense as every mam is not
brought. It is of course to be
noted that although the sense is

जहृद्धमेत्व 148
जात्य
given up by cach word, it is ngt
completely given up: cf जहृदप्यसेो
स्वार्थं नात्यन्ताय जहृति: M. Bh. on P.
II. 1.1. Wart. 2. For detailed
explamation see Mahabhasya on
P. II. I. I. Vart. 2.
जहद्धर्मत्व abandonment or giving up
of properties in the case of a
word included in a वृति or compo-
site expression; cf. जहृद्धर्मत्वाच्छब्दप्रवृत्तेः
Durghata Vrtti on P. II. 2.6.
जाग्रहृीतेतिवाद a short disguisition on
the correctness of the word जाग्रहीता,
written by a grammarian named
|
|
|
Cakrin; cf. भट्टोजिदीक्षितग्राह्यग्रस्तं माधव- ]
दिग्गजम् अमूमुचत् सत्यवयचक्री चक्रप्रसादभाक्,
colophon.
जात born or produced there or then;
one of the senses in which the
tad. affixes, called जातार्थक, are
prescribed by Panini in the sutra
तत्र जातः and the following : cf. P.
IV. 3.25-37.
जातबहिरङ्गासिद्धत्व invalidity of a Ba-
hiranga operation that has al-
ready taken place by virtue of
the Antaranga-paribhs-असिद्धं
बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्ग- that which is * bahi-
. ranga' is_regarded as not having
taken effect when that which is
*antarahga' is to take effect. For
details see Par. Sek. Paribhङ् 50.
जाताभीयासिद्धत्व invalidity of a gra-
mmatical operation prescribed by
a rule in the अाभोय section (P. Vf.
4. 22 upto the end of the fourth
pada ) which, although it hastaken
place is to be looked upon as not
having taken place when any other
operation in the same section is
to take effect. See आभीयासिद्व.
जात genus class;universal;the notion
of generality which is present in
the several individual objects ofthe
same kind The biggestor widest
' motion of the universal or genus is
सत्ता which, according to the gra-
mmarians, exists in every object
or substance, and hence, it is the
denotation or denoted sense of
every substantive or Pratipadika,
although on many an occasion
vyakti or an individual object is
required for daily affairs and is
actually referred to in ordinary
talks. In the Mahabhasya a
learned discussion is held regard-
ing whether जाति is the denotation
or व्यक्ति is the denotation. The
word जाति is defined in the Maha-
bhasya as follows :- आकृतिग्रहृणा
जुतिर्लिङ्गानां च न सर्वभाक् | सकृदाख्यातनि-
गुह्या . गोत्रं च चरणैः सह | अपर आहृ !
प्रादुर्भावविनाशाभ्यां सत्त्वस्य युगपद्गुणे: । असर्व-
लिङ्गां बहुथ तां जातिं कवये विदुः M. Bh.
on IV. 1.63. For details sce
Bhartphari's Vakyapadiya.
जातिपक्ष the view that जाति, or genus
only, is the denotation of every
word. The view was first advo-
cated by Vajapyayana which was
later on held by many, the Mima-
rhsakas being the chief supporters
of the view. See Mahabhasya
on P. I. 2.64. See Par. Sek. Pari.
40.
जातिपदार्थवाद् see जातिपक्ष.
ज्ञातिस्बर the acute accent for the
last vowel of a word ending with
क्त of the p.p.p. denoting a genus;
cf. P. VI. 2.170.
जातीयर् tad. affix जातीय in the sense
of प्रकार or variety: e. g. पटुजातीय:,
मृदुजातीय:: cf Kas. on P. V. 3.69.
Originally जातीय was possibly an
independent word, but as its use,
especially as a noun, was found
restricted, it came to be looked
upon as an affix om the analogy
of the affixes कल्प, दय, देशीय and
others.
जात्य name of a variety of the Sva-

जाम
rita or circumflex accent; the |
original svarita accent as contra-
sted with the svarita for the grave |
which follows upon an acute
as prescribed by P. in VIII. 4.67,
and which is found in the words
इन्द्र:, होता etc. The jatya svarita is
noticed in the words स्व:, क, न्यक्,
कृन्या etc.; .cf. उदात्तपूर्वं स्वरितमनुदात्तं |
पृदक्षरम् ' अतेन्यत् सूरितं स्वारं जात्यमाचक्षते |
पदे । जात्या स्वभावेनैव उदात्तानुदात्तसंगतिं |
विना जातो जात्यः | तं जात्यमाचक्षतै व्याडप्रभृतयः
R. Pr. and com. III. 4.
जाम tautologous, unnecessarily
repeated; the word is defined and
illustrated by Yaska as;-तद्यत्समान्या- !
मृचि समानाभिव्याहृारं भवति तञ्जामि भवतीत्येकं |
मधुमन्तं मधुश्रुतमिति यथा Nir.x.16.2. For|
other definitions of the word जाम
9onveying practically the same
idea, cf. Nir.X. 16. 3 and 4.
जादृच् tad. affix added in the sense
of*a root to the words कर्ण, अक्षि, नख,
मुख and others; e. g. कर्णजाहृम् cf. P.
V.2.24.
जि a conventional term for सेप्रसारण
used in the Jainendra Vyakarana.
जित् (l) lit. affix marked with the
mute letter ज्: e. g. जस्, जसि, जुम्.
the word fजत् is not however found
used in this sense; (2) a word
supposed to be marked with the
mute indicatory letter ज्ञ,The word
is used in this sense by the Wartti-
kakara saying that such a word
does not denote itselfbut its syno-
nyms; cf. जित् पर्यायवचनस्यैव राजांद्यर्थम्
P.I.1.68 Vairt. 7. In the Suitra सभा
राजामनुष्यपूर्वा P.II. 4. 23, the word
राजन् is supposed to be जित् and
hence it denotes इन, ईश्वर etc.; but
not the word राजन् itself: (3) In the
Pratisakhya works जित् means the
first two consonants of each class
(वर्ग): e.g. क्, ढ, ज्ञ, ऋ. etc. which are
the same as खय् letters in Painis
149
जुमरनन्दिन
terminology; cf. द्वौ द्वौ प्रथमौ जित्, V*
Pr.I.50:III.13.
जिनचन्द्र author of the Siddhantaratna
a commentary on the Sarasvata
Sitras,
जिनेन्द्रबुाद्ध a reputed Buddhist Gra-
mmarian of the eighth century
who wrote a scholarly comment-
ary on the Kasikavrtti ofJayaditya
and Vamana. The commentary is
called न्यास or कादिाक्रााववरणपञ्जिका and
the writer is referred to as न्यासकार
in many later grammar works
Some scholars identify him .with
पूज्यपाददेवनन्दिन् the writer ofthe जेनन्द्र-
ब्य्ाकरण, but this is not possible as
पूज्यपाददवनन्दन् was a Jain Gramma-
fian who fourished much earlier.
जिन्नर्दशा mention as जित्: cf. जिालेदेश:
कर्तब्य: M.Bh. on I.1.68 Wrt. 7.See
जित्.
fजहुॅ used in the sense of जिह्वाग्र, the
tip of the tongue.
जिह्वामूलस्थान (l)having the root of the
tongue as the place of its produc-
tion;the phonetic element or letter
called जिह्वामूलीय; (2) name given to
that phonetic element into which
a visarga is changed when follow-
ed by क् or ख; cf> क इति जिह्वामूलीयः
V.Pr.VIII.19. The जिह्वामूलीय letter
is called जिहृथ also; see Nyasa on I.
1.9. The Rk. Pratisakhya looks
upon ऋ, ल, जिह्वामूलीय, and the gut-
tural letters as जिह्वामूलस्थान.
जिह्वामूलीय produced at the root of
the tongue the same as जिह्वामूलस्थान,
which see above. _
जुक् augment ज् added to the root वा
before the causal sign णिच् when
the root means shaking:cf.वीं विधूनन
जुक् P. VII. 3.38.
जुमरनन्द्न् a grammarian of the
fourteenth century A. D. who '
revised and rewrote the.grammar
{ { संक्षिप्तसार and the commentary named

जुस् _____
रसवतीं on it, which were composed
by क्रमदीश्वर in the thirteenth
, century. The work of जुमरनन्दिन् is
known as र्जौमारव्याकरण.
जुस् verbal termination उस् substitut*
ed for the originai झि of the third
ers. pl, in certain cases mentioned
inP.III.4.108,109,110,111, and 112.
जुस्भाव the transformation of झि into
जुस् : the substitution of जुस् for इ.
The term is often used in the
Mahabhsya; cf. M. Bh. on I.
1.57, I.1.63, III.1.43 etc. See जुक् .
_K the class of roots headed
by हु after which the vikaraha Sap
is 6श्रided and the root is reduplica-
ted in the four conjugational tenses;
third conjugation of roots.
न्द्रव्याकरण name of a grammar
work written by Pujyapada Deva-
nandin, also called Siddhanandin,
in the fifth century A.D. The
grammar is based on the ASadh-
yay ofPanini,the section on Vedic
. accent and the rules of Panini exp-
laining Vedic forms being,of course,
neglected. The grammar is called
Jainendra Vyakarana orJainendra
Sabdanusasana. The work is avail-
able in two versions, one consisting
of 3000 suitras and the other of3700
sutras. it has got many comment-
aries, of which the Mahavrtti
written by Abhayanandin is the
principal one. For details see
Jainendra Vyakarana, introduction
published by the Bharatiya ]fina-
pitha Varadas.
जेनन्द्रव्याकरणमहावृत्ति name of a com-
mentary on the Jainendra Vyaka-
rana, written by Abhayanandin in
, the minth century A. D. see जेनन्द्र-
व्याकरण above.
ज्ञौमार ( व्याकरण ) a treatise on vya-
'karaha written by Jumaranandin.
_
150
See डुमरनन्दिन् above TheJaumara
ज्ञापक
Vyakarana has no Vedic section
dealing with Vedic forms or ac-
cents,but it has added a section on
Prakpita just as the Haima Vya-
karaha.
जौमारपारीझोट a supplement to the
Jaumara Vyakarana written by
Goyicandra. See गीयीचन्द्र.
जौमारसंस्करण the revised version by
Jumiranandin of the original
grammar treatise in verse called
संक्षिप्तसार written by KramadiSvara,
The Jaumarasamskarana is the
samc as.jaumara Vyakarana, which
sce above.
जौहोत्याद्विक a root belonging to the
जुईोत्यादिगण or the third conjugation.
ज्ञानदीपिका name of a commentary on
Amarasimhas Amarakosa written
by Sripati (Chakravartin) in the
14th century.
ज्ञापक lit.indirect or implicit revealer;
a word very commonly used in
the sense of an indicatory state-
ment. The Sutras, especially those
of Pinini, are very laconic and it is
believed that not a single word in
the Stras is devoid of purpose.
f it is claimed that a particular
word is without any purposc, the
object of it being achieved in
somc other way, the commenta-
tors always try to assign somc pur-
pose or the other for the use of the
word in the Stitra. Such a word
or words or sometimes even the
whole Sutra is called ज्ञापक्र or indi-
cator of a particular thing. The
Paribhss or rules of interpreta-
tion are mostly derived by indica-
tion(ज्ञापकसिद्ध) from a word or words
in a Sitra which apparently appear
to be व्यथे or without purpose, and
which are shown as साथैंक्र after the
particular indication ( ज्ञापन ) is
drawn from them. The शापक is

ज्ञापकसमुच्चय
151
ज्वलित
shown to be constituted of our|
parts, वैयथ्र्य, _ शापन, स्वस्मिचारिताथ्र्य|
and अन्यत्रफल. For the instances of|
Uflapakas, see Paribhasendusekhara.
Purusottamadeva in his Ufapaka-
samuccaya has drawn numerous
conclusions of the type of ज्ञापन
from the wording of Panini Sitras.
The word ज्ञापक and ज्ञापन are
used many times as synonyms
although ज्ञापन sometimes refers to
the conclusions drawn from a
wording which is ज्ञापक्र or indica-
tor. For instances of ज्ञापक, cf.M.Bh.
on Mahesvara Stºtras 1, 3, 5, P. I.1.
3, 11, 18, 23, 51 etc. The word ऊद्
in the rule वाहृ ऊट् is a wellknown
ज्ञापक्र of the अन्तरङ्गपरिभाषा. The
earliest use of the word ज्ञापक in the
sense given above, is found in the
Paribhasasticana of Vyadi. The
Paribhas works on other systems
ofgrammar such as the Katantra,
the Jainendra and others have
drawn similar Japakas from the
wording of the Sitras in their
systems. Sometimes a ]fpaka is
not regularly constituted of the
four parts given above;it is a mere
indicator and is called बोधक instead
of ज्ञापक्र.
ज्ञापकसमुच्चय a work giving a collec-|
tion of about 400 Uflpakas or
indicatory wordings found in the
Sutras of Panini and the conclu-
sions drawn from them. It was
written by Purusottamadeva, a
Buddhist scholar of Panini's gram-
mar in the twelfth century A. D.,
who was probably the same as the
famous great Vaiyakarana patron-
ized by Laksmanasena.See पुरुषेत्तम-
देव.
ज्ञापकसाध्य realizable, or possible to |
be drawn, from a wording in the
Sutra of Panini in the manner
shown above. See ज्ञापक.
ज्ञापकसिद्ध realized from the ज्ञापक
wording; the conclusion drawn
from an indicatory. word in the
form of Paribhsas and the like.
Such conclusions are not said to
be universally valid; cf. ज्ञापकसिद्धं न
सर्वत्र Par. Sek. Pari, 110.7.
ज्ञापन a conclusion or inference,
drawn from a word or words in a
Sitra, with a view to assign a
purpose to that or to those words
which otherwise would have been
without a purpose. The word is
sometimes used in the sense of
ज्ञापक, and refers to the word or
words supposed to be without any
purpose and therefore looked upon
as a reason or हेतु for the desired
conclusion to be drawn. The
words किमेतस्य ज्ञापन प्रयेोजनम् occur
very frequently in the Mahabhasya:
cf, M.Bh. on P. I. I. 1 l, 14,19, 55,
68, I. 2.4l etc. etc.
ज्ञापित concluded or proved by means
of a ज्ञापक word or wording: cf. हृन्ते:
पूर्वविप्रतिषेधे वार्तिकेनैव ज्ञापितः M.Bh. on
III. 4.37 Vart. 8.
ज्ञाप्य a conclusion or formula to be
drawn from a japaka word or
words; cf. the usual expression
यावता विनानुपपत्तिस्तावतीं ज्ञाप्यत्वम् stating
that only so much, as is absolutely
necessary, is to be inferred.
ज्ञाप्यमान indicated or suggested: cf.
उत्पातेन ज्ञाप्यमान ( चतुर्था वाच्या ) वाताय
कपिला विद्युत् etc. M.Bh. on II. 3.13
Wrt. 3.
ज्योत्स्ना (1) name of a commentary
by Ramacandra possibly belong-
ing to the 18th century on the
Vijasaneyi Pratisakhya; (2) name
of a commentary on NageSa's
'Laghusabdendusekhara by Uda-
yamakara Pathaka of Varanasi in
the 18th century.
| ज्वलिति standing for ज्वलादि, name of

इम् 152
ऊनम्
a class of 30 roots headed by the इष् a short term ( प्रत्याहृार) for the
root ज्वल दीप्तौ and given asचल कम्पन,
जळ घातनै etc: cf: उचलितिकसन्तेभ्ये ण: P.
III. 1.140.
इ
इल् fourth consonant of the palatal
class of consonants possessed of the
properties नादानुप्रदान, घोष, संवृतकण्ठत्व,
and महृाप्राणत्व: इम् at the beginning of
an affix in Pahini Sitras is mute;
e. g the affixes ज्ञि, इ etc.: cf बुद्धे P.
I. 3.7.
इस a verbal ending of the 3rd pers.
fourth ( इस, भ, घ, ढ and घ ) of the
class consonants; cf. P.VIII. 2.37,
40.
इित (1) verb-ending of the 3rd pers.
pl. Parasmaipada, substituted for
the लकार of the ten lakras, chang-
ed to जुस in the potential and the
benedictive moods, and optionally
so in the imperfect and after the
sign स् of the aorist , cf.P,III. 4. 82,
83, 84, 108, 109, 1 10, 111, 112: (2)
a conventional term for अव्यय (in-
declinable) used in the Jainendra
Vyakaraha.
Atm. for ळ ( i.e. लकार ): cfP. III.4. | इित् a termmeaning having इम् as इत्'
78; for the letter इ, अन्त् is substitu-
ted; cf. ईौन्त: P. VIII.1.3, but ईर in
the perfect tense: cf. P. III. 4.81
and रन् in the potential and bene-
dictive moods; cf. P. III. 4.85.
इच् wording of the affix इ (see above)
suggested by the Wrttikakara to
have the last vowel of अन्त acute,
by चित: (P.VI.1.163) the property
{वत्व being transferred from the
original इ to अन्त: cf. Kas. तथा च
इंचश्चित्करणमर्थवद् भवति on P.VII.1.3.
used by the Virttikakra in con.
nection with those words in the
rules of Panini which themselves
as well as words referring to their
special kinds, are liable to under-
go the prescribed operation: cf.
इित् तस्य च तद्विशेषाणां च मत्स्याद्यर्थम् ;
पक्षिमत्स्यमृगान् हृन्ति ' मास्यकः तद्विशेषाणाम्
इ!ारिकः शाकुलिक्र: । M.Bh.on P.I. 1.
68 Vart. 8.
ज्ञ
इसय् a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the ऋ (1)the nasal (fifth consonant)of the
fourth, third, second and first con-
sonants of the five classes, after
which द् is changed into the cog-
nate of the preceding consonant
while ， is changed into ङ्क option-
ally: cf. P. VIII. 4.62, 63.
इर् a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for any
consonant _ except semi-vowels,
nasals and ढ: cf. P. VIII.4.65.
इब्ट् a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for conso-
nants excepting semi-vowels and
nasals; cf. P.I.2.9, VI.1.58,VI.4.
palatal class of consonants possess-
ed of the properties नादानुप्रदान, घीष,
कण्टसंवृतत्व, अल्पप्राण and अानुनासिक्य: (2)
mute letter, characterized by which
an.affix signifies वृद्धि for the pre-
ceding vowel & ofa taddhita affix,
however, signifies वृाद्ध for the first
vowel of the word to which the affix
is added; (3) a mute letter added
to a root at the end to signify that
the root takes verb-endings ofboth
the padas.
15, VII. 1. 60, VIII. 2.39, and | न tad. affix अ, cf. P, IV. 2. 58, 106,
VIII.4.53.
107 and IV.4.129.
इत़ि a short term C प्रत्याहृार ) for the ] मम a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the
fourth and the third of the class
consonants; cf. P, VIII. 4.53, 54.
five nasal consonants ङ्क , न्, ण्, न
and म् . -

ज्ञिन 153
ञ्युद्
ञ्जि a mute syllable prefixed to a
root in the Dhtupagha of Pnini*
signifying the addition of the
affix त (क्त) to the root, in the sense
of the present time: e.g. क्ष्विण्णः, धृष्ट:
etc.; cf. Kas. on P. III. 2.187.
ञ्जिठ tad. affix इक added to words
headed by का िas also to words
meaning a village in the Vahika
country optionally with the affix
ठञ्ज im the Saisika senses;e.g. कादिका,
क्रांइक्री, वैदिका, ' वेदिकी, ढाकलिकंा, द्राक-
लिक्री. The affixes ठञ् and ञ्जिठ are
added to the word काल preceded
by आपद् asalso by some other
words: e. g. आपत्कालका, अापत्काळिको
तात्काालेका, तात्कालिकी etc.; cf. P. IV.2.
116,117,118 and Vrttika on IV.
* 2.116.
ञ्जित् (1) an afix marked with the
mute letter इ causing the substi-
tution of vrddhi for the preceding
vowel and acute accent for the first
vowel of the word to which it is
added, but, causing wrddhi for the
first vowel of the word to which it
is added in case the affix is a tad.
affix: cf. P.VII.2, 115, l 16, 117;
(2) a root marked with the conso-
nant सू , taking verb-endings of
both the Parasmaipada and the
Atmanepada kinds; e.g. करोति, कुरुत,
बिभर्ति, बिभृत, क्रीणाति, क्रीणीते elc.: cf.
the word गम्भीर and अब्ययीभाव com-
pounds in the sense of present
there', e.g. गाम्भीर्यम् , पारिमुख्यम् etc.
cf. P.IV.3.58, 59 (3) to the word
विदूर e.g. वैदुर्य: cf. P. IV.3.84;.(4)to
the words headed by ढाण्डक in the
sense of *domicile of', e.g. शाण्डिक्यः ;
cf. P. IV.3.92: (5) to the words
छन्देग, औक्थिक्र, नट , etc. in the
sense of duty (धमे) or scripture
C अाम्नाय ) e. g. छान्दोग्यम् , औक्थिक्यम्
नाट्यम् etc.: cf. P. IV.	3.129;
(6) to the word गृहृपात in the sense
of associated with': e.g. गार्हपत्यः
(अह्मि:);cf.P.IV.4.90;(7) to the words
ऋषभ and उपानहु ; cf. P. V.1.14; .(8)
to the words अनन्त, आवसथ etc.,cf. P.
V.4.23; (9) to the word अतिथि; cf.
P.V.4.26; and (10) to the words
in the sense of पूग(wandering tribes
for earning money), as also to
the words meaning नात (kinds of
tribes) as also to words ending
with the affix फळ under certain
conditions; cf. P.V.3. 12, 113.
K tad. affix in the sense of *a des*
cendant added to words beginn-
ing with अा, ए, ओ orending with इ,
as also to the words कंसल and
अजाद् provided they mean a coun-
try and a Ksatriya too; e.g. सोवीर्य:,
आवन्त्यः, कीन्त्यः क्रौसल्य:, अाजाद्यः; cf. P.
IV.1.171.
¶ ¶ ¶ P... | यद् tad. affix य .causing वृद्धि to the
ञ्जीत् a root marked with the mute
syllable ञ्जि prefixed to it, signifying
the addition of the affix क्त in the
, present tense. See ञ्जि.
य taddhita affix य signifying the
substitution of wrddhi as also
* the acute accent for the first
vowel of the word ， to which
\ it is added It is added : (1) to
words headed by प्रगदिन् in the
four senses termed वंतुरर्थ e.g.प्रागृद्यम्,.
:शारद्यम् etc.::cf.P.IV.. 2.80; (2).to
20 _
first vowel of the word to which
it is added and the addition of ई
( ड्प् ) in the sense of feminine
gender, added to words meaning
warrior tribes of the Vahika coun-
try but not Brahmanas or Ksatri-
yas. e.g. क्षौद्रक्यः, क्षौद्रक्री etc.: cf P.
: V. 3. 114.
krt affix added to the root वद् in
Vedic .Literature preceded by the
' words कव्य, पुरीष, पुरीष्य or हृव्य, e.g.
. क्रव्यवाहृन:, पुरीषवाहृनः, हृल्यबाहुन:; cf. P.
III,2.65, 66.. . _

154
टीटच्
उ
द the first consonant of the lingual
class ( टवर्ग ) possessed of the pro-
perties श्वासानुप्रदान, अचेष, विवृतकण्ठत्वं
and अल्पप्राणत्व. When prefixed or
affixed to an affix as an indica-
tory letter, it signifies the addition
of the fem. affix डीप् ( ई ); cf. P. IV.
1.15, When added to the conju-
gational affixes ( लकार ) it shows
that in the Atmanepada the vowel
of the last syllable is changed to
ए. cf. P. III. 4.79. When added
to an augment ( अागम ), it shows
that the augment marked with it
is to be prefixed and not to be
affixed; e. g. नुट्, तुट् etc.; cf P. I.
1.46. _
ट (1) the consonant ट्, the vowel
अ being added for facility of
utterance; cf. अकारो व्यञ्जनानाम्, T.
Pr. I. 21: (2) short term, (प्रत्याहृार)
standing for टवगे or the lingual
class of consonants, found used
mostly in t the Pratisºkhya
works; cf. RT. 13, W. Pr. I. 64,
T. Pr. I. 27: (3) tad. affix ( अ )
added to the word फल्गुनी in the
sense * तत्र जातः ? e. g. फल्गुनी, cf. P.
IV. 3.34, Vart. 2; (4) krt affix
( अ ) added to the root चर्, सु and
च under certain conditions; e. g.
कुरुचर:, अग्रेसुर:, यज्ञारकरी ( विद्या ) दिवाकरः,
वेिभकर्: कर्मकर: etc.: cf. P. III.
2.16-23.
टक् krt affix अ, not admitting गुण or
वृद्धि to the preceding vowel and
causing डीप् in the feminime ( by
P.IV. 1.15), added to the roots गा,
पा and हृन् under certain condi-
tions; e. g. समग:, सुराप:, पतिघ्नी etc.;
cf. P. IV. 2.8, 52, 53, 54, 55.
टकार the consonant ट्, कार being
added for facility of utterance;
cf. वर्णात्कार P. III. 3.108 Virt. 3;
cf. also V. Pr, I.17.
दच् the samsnta affix अ added to
certain specified words at the end
of the tatpurusa and other com-
pounds e.g. राजसखः, पञ्चगवम्, मह्यानसम्,
समक्षम् , अध्यात्मम् etc. cf P.V.4.91-112.
टवर्ग the class of lingual consonants;
the same as @ in Panini.
टा case ending of the third case
(तृतीया) sing. number; cf. P. IV.1.2,
टाङ्क sho t term for affixes beginning
with टाप् in P. IV. 1.4 and ending
with ष्यङ् in P. IV. 1.78: cf. टाडिति
प्रत्याहृारग्रहृणम् | टापः प्रभृति आ ष्यङ डकारात्
M. Bh. on I. 2.48 V. 2.
टाप् feminine affix अा added to mas-
culine nouns ending in अ by the
rule अजाद्यतष्टाप् IV. 1.4 excepting
those nouns where any other affix
prescribed by subsequent rules
becomes applicable.
दि the final syllable beginning with
a vowel; part of a word consisting
of the final vowel in a word and
the consonants following the final
vowel; cf अचेन्त्यादि टि P. I. 1.64.
टिठन् (l) tad. affix इक added to the
words श्राणा, मांस and ओदन in the
sense of " sotncthing given as
wages e. g. श्राणक्रः श्राणिक्री; cf. P.
IV. 4.67; (2) tad. affix इक added
to कंस and √ in the अाहृय senses
e. g. कंसक्र:, कंसेक्री: cf. P. V.1.25,26.
दित् marked or characterized by the
mute letter ट्. For the signifi-
cance of the addition of ट्, see ट्.
टिळीप deletion or elision of the finak
syllable beginning with a vowel,
as prescribed by Panini in
certain rules; cf. भस्य टेलेपि: VII.
1.88, ट: P. VI, 4.143, 155 नस्तद्धिते
P. VI. 4.144 and अहुखेरेव P. VI.
4.145.
टीटच् tad. affix टीट added to the
preposition अच in the sense of

उ
ढ
उक् augment ट् added to that in
टेण्यण् tad, affix एप्य added to the
¶ tad. affix य, causing वृद्धि for the
टढ tad. affix अन to which the aug-
दढळ tad. affix added in the same
ट्
ले
155
ठक्
*lowering of the nose' ( नासिकाया:
नतम् ) e. g. अवटीटम्: cf. P. V. 2.31.
(!) mute syllable दु prefixed to
roots to signify the addition of
the afix अधुच् in the sense of ver-
bal activity: e. g. वेपथुः, श्वयथु:, cf.
P.III. 3.89; (2) the class of lingual
consonants द्, ट्, ड्, दृ and ण्: cf
बुट् P. I. 3.7.
connection with which it is pres-
cribed: it is prescribed in connec-
tion with ड् and ण् followed by a
sibilant, e. g. सुगण्+षष्ठः = सुगण्ट्|ृष्ठ:;
cf. P, VIII. 8.28.
word ढक्र meaning * a warrior
tribe not of a Brahmana nor of a
Satriya caste in the sense of the
word ( वृक ) itself e. g. वाकेण्य:, cf.
P. V. 3.1 ] 5
initial vowel and the addition of
the fem. affix ई, applied to the
word सोम in the sense of * having
that as a deity,' e. g. सौम्यं हृविः,
सैौमी ऋकू: cf. P.TV. 2.80.
ment ， is prefixed, making the
affix तन, applicable to the words
सायं, चिरं, ग्रहृ, प्रगे ,and indeclinable
words in the Saisika or misce-
llaneous senses; e. g. सायंतन:, चिरंतनः
दिवातनम् etc.: cf. P. IV. 3.23, 24.
way as ट् above, making only a
difference in the accent. When
the affix ट् is added, the acute
accent is'given to the last vowel
of the wordpreceding the affix.
* tad. affix ल, causing wrddhi for
the initial vowel of the word to
which it is added and also the
addition of the fem.affix ई,applied
to the word ढामी in the sense |
of * विक्रार,' e. g. इामीली बुक्: cf.
Kas. on P. IV. 3.142.
द्वित् having दु as इत्: roots, that
have द्ध as इत् or mute, take the
affix अश्रुच् in the sense of verbal
activity. See ढ.
ठ
द् the second consonant of the ling-
ual class possessed of the proper-
ties श्वासानुप्रदान, अधेष, विवृतकण्टत्व and
महाप्राणत्व. For the syllable ठ at
the beginning of taddhita affixes,
the syllable इक् is substituted; if
however the affix (beginning with
ठ ) follows upon a word ending
in इस्, उस्र , उ, ऋ, ल and त् then क
is added instead of इक्; e. g.
धानुष्क्र:, औदश्वित्कः etc.: cf. टस्येक:,
इसुसुक्तान्तात् क्र:, P. VII. 3.50, 51.
Some scholars say that इक् and कू
are substituted for इ by the stras
guoted above : cf. KS. on VII.
3.50.
ठ (l) tad. affix ठ; see º above for the
substitution of इक and क्र for ठ.
ठ stands as a common term for
ठकू , ठन् , ठञ्, and ठच् as also for
ठळ,ष्ठन् , and छऋ: (2) the consonant
ठ, the vowel अ being added for
facitity of pronunciation, cf. T.
Pr. I.21.
ठक् a very common tad. affix इक,
or क in case it is added to words
ending in इस् , उस्र , उ, ऋ, ल् and
त् according to P. VII. 3. 51,
causing the substitution of wrddhi
for the first vowel of the word to
which it is added. ठक् is added
to (1) रेवती and other words in the
sense of descendant ( अपत्य ) e. g.
रेवातकः, दाण्डग्राह्यक:, गार्गिकः, भागवित्तिक्र:
यामुन्दायनिकः, cf. P. IV. 1.146-149;
(2) to the words लाक्षा,रान्वना etc.
in the sense of *dyed in', e. g.

ठक्
लाक्षक्रम्, रोन्वानकम् : cf. P. IV. 2.2: (3)
to the words दधि and उदश्व़ित् in the
sense of संरकृत .made better ', e. g.
, दाधिक्रम् , औदश्वित्केम् ( क्र instead of इर्क
substituted for ठक् ), cf. P. IV.2.
18, 19: (4) to the words अाग्रहृयुगी,
अश्वत्थ etc.: cf. P. IV. 2. 22, 23; (5)
to words expressive of inanimate
objects, to the words हृस्ति and धनु,
as also to the words केढा and अश्च
in the sense of * multitude '; cf. P.
IV. 2. 47, 48; "6) to the words
क्रतु, उक्थ and words ending in सृञ्ज,
वस्तन्त etc., in the sense of * students
of* ( तदधीते तद्वद् ), cf. P. IV. 2.59,
60, 63; (7) to the words कुमुद and
others as also to दार्करा as a चातुरर्थिक
affix; cf. P. IV. 2.80, 84: (8) to
the words कन्था, भवत् and वर्षा in the
Saisika senses: cf. P. IV. 2.102,
115, IV. 3.18: (9) to the words
उपजानु and others ' in the sense
* * generally present '; cf. P. IV. 3.
40; (10) to the words consisting of
two syllables, and the words ऋक्,
ब्राह्मण etc.in the sense offexplanatory
literary work'; cf. P. IV.3.72: ( 1)
to words meaning * sources of in-
come ' in the sense of * accruing
from *: cf. P. IV. 3.75: (12) to
words denoting inanimate things
excepting words showing time or
place in the sense of * भक्ति ', cf
P. IV. 8.96; and (13) to the words
हृल् and सीर in the sense of *belong-
ing to', cf. P. IV. 3.124. The tad.
affix ठक् is added as a general
termination, excepting in such
cases where other affixes are pre-
scribed, in specified senses like
* तेन दीव्यति, * *तन खनति, * तेन संस्कृतम्
etc-; cf P. IV. 4.1-75, as also to
words हृल, सीर, कथा, विक्रथा, वितण्डा etc.
in specified senses, cf. P. IV.4. 81,
102 ठक् is also added as a general
tad. affix or अधिकारविहृितप्रत्यय, in
various specified senses, as pre-
156 ;
ठञ्
scribed by P. V.1.19-63,and to the
words उदर, अयःशूळ,दण्ड, अजन, अङ्गुली,
मण्डल, etc. and to thc word एकइाला,
in the prescribed senscs; cf. P. V.
2.67,76, V. 3.108,109: while, with-
out making any change in sense
it is added to अनुगादिन् , विनय, समय,
उपाय ( औपयिक्र being the word
formed), अकस्मात्, कथंचित्: (cf.आक्रस्मिक
क्रार्थचित्क्र), समूहृ,विशेष्, अत्यय and others,
and to the word वाक् in the sense of
*expressed*: cf. P. V. 4.13, 34, 35.
The fem. affix डीप् ( ई ) is added to
words ending in the affix टक् to
form fem. bascs.
ठक्पाद a popular mame given to the
fourth pda of the fourth adhyaya
of Pani.i's Asidhyy.The pda be-
gins with the rule प्राग्वहृतष्ठक्P.IV.4.1
prescribing the taddhita affix ठक्
in the senses prescribed in rules be- .
ginning with the next rule * तेन
दीव्यति खनति जयति जितम् ' and ending
with the rule *निक्रटे वसति' P.IV.4.73.
ठच tad. affix इक्र or क्र (by P.VII.3.51)
with the vowel अ accented acute
applied to (1) कुमुद and others as a
Caturarthika affix cf. P. IV.2.80;
(2) to multisyllabic words and
words beginning with उप which
are proper nouns for persons; cf.
P. W.3.78, 80; and (3) to the word
एक्रझाला in the sense of इव; cf. P.
V.3.109. The base, to which टच् is
added, retains generally two sylla-
bles or sometimes thrce, the rest
being elided before the affix ठज्ञ
e. g. दविक:, वायुक:, पितृक्र: ईवलिक: etc.
from the words देवदत्त, व्युदत, पितृ-
दत्त, देवलद्त etc.; cf. P. V,3.83, 84.
ठञ्र् tad. affix इक or क (by P.VII.3.51)
causing Vrddhi and acute accent
for the first vowel of the word to
which it is added, applied ( 1) to
महृाराज, श्रेष्ठपद and क्रवाचन् in the
, specified.senses, cf.. P- IV.2.35, 4l

ठन्
e. g. माहृाराजक, प्रौष्ठपादेक etc.; (2) to
words काज्ञि, चदि, संज्ञा and others,
along with ञ्जिट, e. g. क्रादिक्रिी, काढिीका,
also with ञ्जिष्ठ to words denoting
villages in the Vahika country e.g.
ढाकलिकी इाकलिका: as also to words
ending in उ forming names of
countries in all the Saisika senses
cf. P. IV.2.116-120; (3) to com-
pound words having a word show-
ing direction as their first member,
to words denoting time, as also to
the words दारद्, निदा and प्रदोष in the
Saisika senses; cf P. IV.3.6, 7, 11-
15; (4) to the words वर्षौ (1n Vedic
Literature), and to हेमन्त and वसन्त
in the Saisika senses; cf. P.IV.3.19-
21: (5) to संवत्सर, अाग्रहृायणी, words
having अन्तः as the first member,
to the word ग्राम preceded by परि or
अनु, to multisyllabic words having
their last vowel accented acute, to
words denoting sacrifices, to words
forming names ofsages, to words
ending in ऋ and to the word महृाराज
in the specific senses which are
mentioned: cf. P. IV.3.50, 60, 6!,
67, 68, 69, 78, 79, 97; (6) to the
words गोपुच्छ, श्वगण, आक्रन्द, लवण, परश्वध,
compound words having a multi-
syllabic words as their first mem-
ber, and to the words गुड etc. in
the specified senses:cf.P.IV.4.6,l I,
38, 52, 58, 64, 103;(7) to any word
as a general tad. affix (अधिकारविहृित),
unless any other affix has been
specified in the specified senses
* तेन क्रीतम् * * तस्य निमित्तम् ... * तदर्हम् ?
mentioned in the section of sutras
V. 1. 18. to 117; (8) to the words
अय:दूल, दण्ड, अजिन, compound words |
having एक्के.or गे as their first mem-
ber as also to the words निष्क्र्त
and निष्कसहृस्र: cf. P.V.2.76, 118,119.
ठन् tad. affix इक or क्र (according to
P. VII.3.5), causing the addition
of आ, and not ई,..for forming the ]
157
ङ्क
feminine base, applied (1) to the
word नौ and wcrds with two
syllables in the sense of crossing'
or 'swimming over ; cf. P.IV.4. 7;
e.g. aाविक: नाविका, बाहुकः बहुक्रा; (2)
to the words वस्र, क्रय, and विक्रयं and
optionally with छ to अायुघ in the
sense of maintaining (तेन जीवति) ; cf.
P. IV. 4.13, 14: (3) to the word
प्रातिपथ, words ending with अग्र,
to the word ढात, to words showing
completion ( पूरणवाचन ), to the
words अर्ध, भाग, वरुन, द्रव्य, षण्मास and-
श्राद्ध in specified senses; cf. P. IV
4.42, 70, V. 1.21, 48, 49, 51, 84,
V. 2, 85, and 109; (4) to words
ending in अ as also to the words
headed by त्रींहृि, and optionally with
' the affix इल्व् to तुन्द् and with the
affix व to केदाin the sense of मतुप्(pos-
session): cf P..V. 2. 115, 116, 117
and 109.
ठित् marked with the mute letter .
There is no affix or word marked
with mute ट् (at the end) in Pami-
nf's grammar, but to avoid cer-
tain technical difficulties, the
Mahabhasyakra has proposed
mute ， instead of द् in the case of
the affix इट् of the first pers sing.
perf Atm. and ऊट् p escribed as
. Sarhprasarapa substitute by P. VI.
4.132 e: g. प्रष्ठौहृ:, प्रष्ठौहृ: cf. M.Bh.
on III.4.79 and VI.4.19.
ड
ड् ( 1 ) third letter of the lingual
~&
class of consonants possessed of the
properties नादानुप्रदान, घोष, संवृतकण्ठत्व,
and अल्पप्राण; (2) mute letter ap-
plied to affixes by Panini to show
the elision of the टि part (cf. P. 1.
1.64.) of the preceding word viz.
the penultimate vowel and the
consonant or consonants follow-
ing it: cf, टः ; ( लेीप: डिति प्रत्यये पर )

ड
ड
डच samsnta (अ) added to a Bahu-
डण् tad. affix अ, causing wrddhi and
डतमच् tad. affix अतम in the sense of
डतरच् tad. affix अतर in the sense of
डतरादि a class of words headed by
158
VI.4.143. The syllable ति of विंदति |
is also elided before an affix mark-
with the mute letter ई.
(1) krt affix अ applied to the root
गम् preceded by अन्त, अत्यन्त, अध्वन्
etc.,as also to the roots हृन् and
जन् nder certain conditions cf
P. III.2,48,49, 50, 97-101 and to
the root क्रम् to form the word नक्र,
cf. P. VI. 3.75: (2) tad. affix अ
applied to words ending in दद्यान्
words ending in शत् and the word
विंइति in the sense of *more than*
e.g. एकाद¶ झातम्, एकत्रिंशम्, एकाइम्, cf
P.V.2.45, 46.
vrjhi compound meaning a nume-
ral e.g. उपदट्राः उपविंशा: cf. P.V.4.74.
tad. affix अ in the sense of पूरण
applied to a numeral to form an
ordinal numeral; e. g. !क्रद्ा:,
त्रयेदढा:, cf. P.V.2.48.
टिलेाप, applied to त्रिंशत् and चत्वारिंदात्
to show the परिमाण i.e. measure-
ment or extemt of a Brahmana
work; e. g. त्रेशानि ब्राह्मणानि, चात्वारिं★ानि
cf P. V. 1.62.
determination or selection of onc
out of many, applied to the pro-
nouns किं, यत् and तत्: e,g. कतमः ; cf.
P.V.3.93,as also to एक according to
Eastern Grammarians; e.g. एकतमेो
भवतां देवदत्तः: cf. P.V.3.94.
*selection out of two' applied to
the words , यत् and तत् as also to
the word एक: e. g. क्रतरो भवतेः पटुः
cf. P. V. 3.92, एकतरे भचतेर्दिवदत्त: cf.
P. W. 3.94.
the word डतर which stands for
डतरान्त i.e. words ending with the
affix डतर; similarly the word डतम
which follows डतर stands for डतमान्त.
डाच्
This class डतरादि is a subdivision of
the bigger class called सर्वादि, and
it consists of only fivc words vi7.
डतरान्त, डतमान्त, अन्य, अन्यतर and इतर:
cf P. VII.1.25 and I.1.27.
डात tad. affix अति affixed to the
word क्रिम् to show number or
measurement , e.g. कति ब्राह्मणा:, cf.
P.V.2.4 . The words ending with
the affix डति are termed संख्या and षट्
for purposes of declension etc.; cf.
P.I.1.23,25.
डर krt affix अर added to the root खम्
in the sense of finstrument or
*location e.g. अाखर:, cf. P. III. 3.
125 Vrt tika.
डस् affix अर् applied to the word
श्वेतवाहृ and others at the end of a
pada i.e. when the word श्वतवाहृ
has got the पदसंज्ञा. e. g. श्चतवा: इन्द्र: !
श्वेतवेीभ्याम् cf P.III.2.71Vart.l and 2.
डू (l) verb-ending अा,causing elision
of the penultimate vowel as also
of the following consonant,
substituted for the 3rd pers. sing.
affix तिप् of the first future : e.g.
कत ; cf. P.II.4.85; (2) case ending
अा substituted in Vedic Literature
for any case affix as noticed in
Vedic usages; e.g. नाभा पृथिव्याम्: cf.
P. VII.1.39.
डाच् tad. affix अ1 applied to dissylla-
bic words, used as imitation of
sounds, or used as onomatopoe-
tic, when connected with the root
कृ or भ् or अम्. The word to which
डाच् is applied becomes generally
doublcd: c. g पटपटाकरोात, पटपटाभवति
पटपटास्यात्: cf. P.V.4.57. The affix
डाच् is also applied to द्वितीय, तृतीय,
to compound words formed of a
numeral and the word गुण, as also
to the words सपत्र, निष्पत्र, सुख, प्रिय etc.
when these words are connected
with the root कृ;e.g. द्वितीयाकरोति,तृतीया-
करोति, द्विगुणाकरोति, सपत्राक्ररोति, सुखाकरोति
etc.; cf. P.V.4, 58 to 67.

डप
159
बु ू
डाप् fem. affix आ added optionally to
words ending in मन् and to Bahu-
wrihi compounds ending in अन् to
show feminine gender, the words
remaining as they are when the
optional affix डाप् is not applied;
e.g. दामा, सीमा, सुपर्वा: cf. P. IV. 1,l l,
12, 13.
• डामहच् tad. affix अामहु added to the
words मातृ and पितृ in the sense of
*father'; e.g. मातामहृ:, पितामहृ:; cf. P.
IV. 2.36 Wart, 2.
डित् possessed of the mute letter डु
added for the purpose of the eli-
sion ofठि (last vowel and the conso-
nant or consonants after it) 0f the
preceding word. See ड.
डिनि (l) tad. affix applied to अवान्तर-
दीक्षा, तिलत्रत etc. in the sense of चरति
(observing): e.g. तिलत्रती, cf. P. V. 1.
94 Vart 3; (2) applied in the sense
of having as measurement'applied
to numeral words ending in इत् or
शिन् and the word विंदति: e.g. त्रिंज्ञिानीं
मासाः, विंशिनेीङ्गिरसः; cf. M. Bh. on P.
W. 2.37.
डिमच् tad. affix इम applied to the
words अग्र, अादि, पश्चात् and अन्त in
the Saisika senses; e.g. अग्रिमम्, अादि-
मम् , पश्चिमम् , अन्तिमम्: cf. M. Bh. on
P.IV.3.23, *
डियाच् case affix इया for Inst.sing.seen
in Vedic Literature: e.g. सुक्षेत्रिया,
सुगात्रिया: cf Kas. on P.VII.1.39.
डुप् tad affix उप added to the word
कुनै in the sense of diminutive: e.g.
कुतुभ: a small oil-pot ( कुतू );cf. V.3.
89.
डुम्सुन् Undi affix उम्स् added to the
root पा to form the word पुस्: cf. पांत
ईम्सुन् Undi Sutra IV.177.
डलच्चु tad. affix उल in the sense of | "
*brother applied to the word मातृ:
e.g. मातुल:: cf. P. IV. 2.36 Vart 1.
हृढप् tad. affix मत् as a चातुरर्थिक affix
applied to the words कुमुद, नड and
वेतेतं: e.g. कुमुद्वान् , नड्वान, वेतस्वान्: cfP.
IV. 2.87.
डय tad. affix य (1) added in the
sensc of * Sama introduced by'
( दृष्टं साम ) to the word वामदेव : e. g.
वामदेव्यं साम: cf P. IV. 2.9; (2)
added to the word खोत्स्र optionally
with यत् in the sense of * present
there ' ( तत्र भवः ) ; e. g. खेीतस्य:, cf.
P. IV. 4.I 13.
डयण् tad. affix य added to the words
पाथस् and नद in the sense of * pre-
sent there ' ( तत्र भवः ), e. g, पाथ्यः
नाद्यः; cf. P. IV. 4.111.
डयत् tad. affix य added along with
डय to the same words to which
the affix डय is added as also in the
same sense, the vowel अ of डयत्
being खारित. See the word डघ
ab0ye.
डया case affix या seen in Wedic Lite-
rature e. g. अनुष्ठथा उच्च्यावयतात् cf. S.
K. on P. VII. 4.39.
ङ्गट् krt affix र with fem. affix ई
added to it, applied to the root
रुत्यै. e.g. स्त्री cf. संस्त्र्याने स्त्यायतेईट् स्त्री M.
Bh. on IV. 1.3.
लच् tad.affix वल्, in the four senses,
added to the words नड and
दाद: e. g. नड्वलम्, शाद्वलम्: cf. P.
IV. 2.88.
हृत् a root marked with the mute
syllable ड् (at the beginning) to
Signify the application of the krt
affix त्रि which is invariably follow-
ed by the addition of म ( मप् ), in
the sense of * achieved by * [ e. g.
पक्त्रिमम् ; कृत्रिमम्: cf. P. III. 8.88 ;
and IV. 4.20.
कुन् tad. affix अक्र added to the
words विंझति and त्रिंशात् in the tetrad
of tad. senses; e. g. विंज्ञाक्र:, त्रिंशाक्र:
cf. P. W. 1.24.

160
ढे
ढ'
द् (1) fourth consonant of the lingual
class of consonants possessed
of the properties नादानुप्रदान, घोष,
संवृतकण्ठत्व and महृाप्राणत्व; (2) the
consonant ढ which is elided when
followed byद् and the preceding
vowel is lengthened; e. g. गाढा,
cf. P. VIII. 3.13 and VI. 3.111 ;
(3) substitute ढ for ， at the end
of a पद, or, if followed by any
consonant excepting a semivowel
or a nasal excepting in the cases
of roots beginning with द् or the
roots बुद्, मुद् etc. as also वइ and
अाहृ cf. P. VIII. 2.31, 32, 33, 34;
(#) इ at the beginning of a tad.
affix which has got एय् substituted
for it: cf. गाङ्गेयं:, वैनतय: : cf. P. V.
3.102.
ढ tad. affix ढ (1) applied to the word
सभा in the sense of *fit for* ( तत्र
साधुः ) in Vedic literature;. e. g.
सभयः ; cf. IV. 4.106: (2) applied to
' the word शिला in the sense of इव;
e. g. इलेयं दधे: cf. P. V. 3.102: (3)
common term ( ढ ) for the affixes
ढक्, ढञ्ज and ढ also, after the
application of which the affix डर्
(ई) is , added in the sense of
feminine gender: cf. P. IV. 1.15. .
ढक् tad. affix एय causing the substitu-
` tion of wrddhi for the first vowel
of the word to which it is"added.
ढक् is added in the sense ofअपत्य
(descendant) (I) to words ending
in feminine affixes, to words end-
ing in thevowel इ, excepting इ of
the tad. afix इञ्ज, to words of the
class headed by कुत्र,
मृण्डुक्, द्विकर्ण, कुषीतक्, भ्रू , .कुल्टा and to
words headed by कल्याणी which get
न substituted for its !ast vowel:gg.
:, दातय्ः ह्रींश्रयं, मूण्ड्केयः, वैकर्णय
कौषीतकेयः, भ्रौवेयुः,.कौलेटयः, केाल्याणिनयः
etc: cf Kas dh P. IV.. 1] 19-127;
*___
to words |'
(2) to the words पितृष्वस्र and मातृष्वसु
with the vowel ऋ elided and to
the word . दुष्कुल, पितृष्वसेय:,
मातृष्वसेयः, दौष्कुलेय:, cf. Kas. on P.
IV. 1.133, 134, 142: (3) to the
word कलि in the sense of Sama,
to the word अ¶ि in the sense of
*dedicated to a deity* ( सास्य देवता )
as also to the words नदी, महृी,
व्राराणसी, श्रावस्त and others in the
Saisika senses: e. g. कलेयं साम,
अञ्जय:, नादयम् मह्ययम् etc. cf Kas. on
P. IV. 2.8, 33, 97: (4) to the
words तूदी, धुर् , कपि, ज्ञाति, व्रीहृि and
झालि in the specified senses: cf.
P. IV. 3.94, IV. 4.77, V. 1.127,
V. 2.2.
e- 9.
ढकढ tad. affix एयक applied (1) to
the word कुल optionally along
with यत् and ख, when it is not a
member of a compound;.e. g.
क्रीळयक्रः, कुल्य:, कुलीनः; cf. P.'IV. 1.
140; (2) to the words केत्त्रि and
others in the Saisika senses as also
to the words कुळ, कुक्षि and ग्रावा, if
the words fornied with the affix
added, respectively mean dog,
sword and ornament : e. g. क्रलेयक्रः
कौलेयक: (श्वा), क्रक्षयक्र: (अास:), प्रैवेयक्रः
(अलंकारः): cf.K. on P.IV 2.95,96.
डम् tad. affix एय causing Vrddhi
| **
substituted for the first vowel ofthe
base and the addition of the fem.
,affix डम् (इ), applicd (1) to words
meaning'.quadrupeds and words
in the class of words headed by |ुष्टि
in the sense of अपत्य: e. g. क्रामण्ड-
लेय:, गाय:, हृालेय:, बांछय: etc: cf- P-
IV.1.135,136: (2) to the word क्षीर,
words of the class headed by साख,
the words क्रीद्वा, दृति, कुक्षि, क्रळाहे, अस्ति,
अहृि,ग्रीवा,वर्मती,एणी,पाथ,अतिथि,वसति,स्वपति,
पुरुष, छदि्, उपध, बलि, परिखा, and
वरित in the various senses mention-
ed in connection with these wordsः
_ c: g:्य:, .सालेमम् क्री|्मs .दर्दयम् ,

_
ढमुक्
161
पा
क्रौक्षयम् etc, cf Kas'. on P. IV. 2.
20, 80, IV. 3. 42, 56, 57, 94, 159,
, IV.4.] 04, V.1.10,13,17, V.3.101.
डिडक् tad. affix एयिन् applied to the
word छगलिन् in the sense of *stude-
nts following the text of * e. g.
छागलेयिन: in the sense छगलिना प्रोक्त-
मधीयत त: cf. Kas. on P. IV.8.109.
ऋ tad. affix एर ( ण्य् + र ) applied in
the sense of offspring to the word
गेधा and optionally with ढक् to
words meaning persons having a
bodify defect or a low social status;
e. g. गौधेरः, कणेर: दासर:: काणेय:, दसय:,
cf Kas. on P. IV. 1. 129, 131.
ण
" (l) fifth consonant of the lingual
class of consonants possessed of
the properties, नादानुप्रदान, घोष, संवृतक्र-
ण्ठत्व, अल्पप्राण and अानुनासिक्य: (2) the
mute letter ण् indicating the substi-
tution of vrddhi ( cf. P. VII. 2.
l l5-117) when attached to affixes;
(3) the consonant ण् at the beginn-
ing of roots which is changed into
न: the roots, having ग् at the begi-
nning changeable to न, being call-
ed णेपदेया: (4) ए as a substitute for
न् following the letters ऋ, ऋ, र्, and
ष् directly, or with the intervention
of consonants of the guttural and
labial classes, but occurring in the
same word, Such a substitution of
ण् for न् is called णत्व: cf. P.VIII.4.
I-39. For णत्व in Vedic HLiterature;
cf. R. Pr.V.20-28, T.Pr.VII.1-12.
V.Pr.III.84-88;(5) the consonant ए
added as an augment to a vowel
at the beginning of a word when
' it follows the consonant ण् at the
end of the previous word; cf. P.
VIHI. 3. 32. In the Vedic Prव्रtiई-
khyas this augment ण् is added to
the preceding ण् and looked upon
as a part of the previous word.
21
(1) krt affix अ, added optionally to
the roots headed by ज्वल् and end-
ing with कस् in the first conjuga-
tion (see ज्वलिति above) in the sense
of agent, and necessariy to the
root्यै, roots ending with अा and
the roots ब्यख्, आबु, संबु, इ with अति,
सो with अव, हृ with अव, लिहु, श्लिष्
and श्वस्, to the roots दु and नो with-
out any prefix and optionally to
ग्रहृ: e. g. ज्वाल: or ज्वल:, अवद्याय:, दाय:,
धाय:, ब्याध:, अाखीव:, संढवि:, अत्याय:,
अवसायः, अवह्यार:, लंदृ:, श्रेष:, श्वास:, दावः,
नाय:, ग्रह्यः or ग्राह्य: ; in the case of the
root प्रद् the affix ण is applied by
ब्यवस्थितविभाषा, the word ग्रहृः meaning
a planet and the word ग्राह्यः
meaning a crocodile; cf Ks.
on P. III. 1.140-143; (2) krt affix
अ in the sense of verbal activity
( भाव ) applied along with the affix
अप् to the root अद् with नि: e.g.न्याद:
निघस:: cf. P. III.3.60; (3) kpt affix
ण prescribed by the Varttikakra
after the roots तन, इीळ. काम, भ and
चर् with आ: cf. P.III.1.140 Vrt 1,
' and III. 2.l Vart. 7; (4) tad. affix
अ in the sense ofअपत्य added along
with टक् also, to a word referring to
a female descendant (गेीत्रखत्री) if the
resultant word indicates censure ;
e. g. गाग्र्यः गार्गिक:: cf. P. IV.1.147,
150: (5) tad. affix अ in the sense
of अपत्य added also with the affix
फिञ्ज, to the word पाण्टाहृति: (6) tad.
affix अ in the sense of *a game'
added to a word meaning *an
instrument in the game'; e.g.
दाण्डा, मोटा: cf. P. IV.2.57: {7) tad.
affix अ added to the word छत्त्र
and others in the sense of *habi-
tuated to e.g. छत्र:, दैक्षः, पौरोद्दः चौर::
cf. P.IV. 4.62: (8) tad. affix अ
added to the words अल, भक्त, सुवे,
पथिन् , यथाकथाच, प्रज्ञा, श्रद्धा, अचर्या, वृत्तिं
and अरण्य in the senses specified
with respect to each ; e.g. अल:

णच्
162 (ण
' (मनुष्यः) भाक्तः ( इालः ), सार्वे ( सर्वेस्मै
हृितम् ), पान्थः, याथाकथाचे (कायेम्),. प्राज्ञ:
or प्रज्ञावान् , श्राद्ध: or श्रद्धावान् , अांचे: or
अचर्वावान् , बार्तः or वृत्तिमान् and अारण्याः
( सुमनसः ): cf. Kas. on P.IV. 4.85,
100, V.1.10, 76, 98, V.2.101 and
IV.2.104 Vºrttika.
णच् krt affix अ in the sense of reci-
procal action, added to any root;
the affix ण् is to get necessarily
the affix अञ्ज added to it followed
by the fem. afix ई e.g. यावक्रोशी,
व्यवहृासी; cf. Ks, on P.III.3.43 and
P. W. 4.14. -
णत्व cerebralization; lingualization ;
( the substitution of ए for न् under
certain conditions; cf. P. VIII.4.
1-39. See ण.
णत्वपद a popular name given by
grammarians to the fourth pda cf.
PaninisAstadhyayi, as the pada be-
gins with the rule रषाभ्यां नो णः समानपदे
and mainly gives rules about
णत्वं i. e. the substitution of the
consonant ण् for न्.
णमुल् ktaffix अम्, causing wrddhi
to the final vowel or to the penul-
timate अ, (!) added to any root in
the sense of the infinitive in Vedic
Literature when the connected root
is इक्: e.g. आज्ञे वै देवा विभाजं नाश्ाक्नुबन:
cf Kas. on P. III. 4.14; _ (2)
added to any root to show
frequency of a past action,
when the root form ending with
णमुल् is repeated to convey the
sense of frequency : e.g. भीजे भोजे
व्रजति, पाशयं व्रजति, cf. K on P. III.
4.22; (3) added to a root showing
Past action and preceded by the
word अत्रे, प्रथम or पूर्व, optionally
along with the krt affix क्त्वा; e.g.
अत्रेर्भोजं or अग्रे भुक्त्वा व्रजति: cf K.
on P.III.4.24;(4) addcd in general
to a root specified in P.III.4.25 to
6, showing a subordinate action
and having the same subject as the
root showing the main action,
provided the root to which णमुल् is
added is preceded by an antecedent
or connected word, such as रूवादुम्
or अन्यथा or एवम् or any other given
in Panini's rules; cf. P. III.4.26 to
III.4.6+: e.g- स्वादुंकारं भुङ्क्त, अन्यथाकारं
भुङ्कते, एवंकृारं भुङ्क्तं, ब्राह्मणेवद भेोजयति,
यंीवेज्जीवमधीते, समूलकाषं कषति, समूलघातं
हृन्ति, तैलपेषं पिनटिं, अजकनादं नट: etc.:
cf KS. on P.III.4.26-64. When
णमुट् is added to the roots कष्, पिष्ट्, हृन्
and others mentioned in P. III. 4.
34 to 45, the same root is repeat-
ed to show the principal action.
The word ending in णमुल् has the
acute accent (उदात) on the first
vowel (cf. P.VI.i. 94) or on the
vowel preceding the affix: cf. P.
V[.1.193.
णमुल्तत्पुरुष a term used in connec-
tion with the compound of the
णमुलन्त with itsउपपदं which precedes;
c.g. अग्रभोजम् , मूलकोपदंश्ट्रम् : cf. P. II.
2.20, 2].
णल्ट् personal ending अ substituted for
तैिप् and मिप् in लिट् or the perfect,
and in thecase of विद् and ， in लट्
or the pres. tcnse optionally; cf P.
III, 4. 82, 83, 8. The affix ण
on account of being marked by
the mute letter णु causes vrddhi to
the preceding vowel; the wrddhi
is, however, optional in the case of
the 1st pers. ( मे ) cf. P. VII.1.91.
अौ is substituted for णल् after roots
ending in अ; cf. P. VII .1.34.
णस् tad. .affix अस् applied to the
word प in the sense of collection.
The original Varttika is पश्र्वाः सयू
P. IV. 2. 43 Vart. 3. Some scho-
lars read णम् in the place of सणु in
the Varttika which is read as पेश्वां
णम् वक्तव्यः by them.
णि common term for णिङ्क ( signifying
*्tmanepada ) and णिच्: cf. णरणैौ

णिङ्ग
163 _ पrन
यस्कमेo P. I. 3.67, णरनिटि VI. 4.51 ;
cf also P. I. 3.86, I. 4.52, II.4.46,
51: III. 2.137: VI. 1.31, 48, 54,
VI. 4.90; VII. 2.26, VII. 3.36;
WII.4.1, VIII. 4.80.
णिङ्क affix इ causing vrddhi, prescribed
after the root क्रम् , the base end-
ing in इ i. e. कामि being called a
root: cf. P. III. 1.30, 32. The
mute letter ङ्क signifies that the root
कामि is to take only the Atmanepada
affixes e. g. कामयत, अचीकमत.
णिच् affix इ causing wrddhi (1)
applied to roots of the tenth conju-
gation ( चुरादिगण ) such as चुर् , चित्
etc. e. g. चोरयति, चोरयत; cf. P. III. ]
1.25: (2) applied to any root to !
form a causal base from it, e. g.
भावयति from भु, गमयति from गम्: cf.
हृतुमति च P. III. 1.26: (3) applied
to the words मुण्ड, मिश्र etc, in the
sense of making, doing, practising
etc. ( करण ); e. g. मुण्डे करोति मुण्डयति,
श्नतयति (eats something or avoids it
as an observance), हृलं गृहृाातं हृलयति
etc.; cf P. III. 1.21; (4) applied
to the words सत्य, पादा, रूप, वीणा, नृल्छ,
श्लेीक, सेना, लेमन, त्वच्, वर्मन्, वर्ण and चूर्ण
in the various senses given by the
Varttikakara to form denominative
roots ending in इ: e. g. सत्यापयति,
पाशायति etc; cf. P. III.1.25: (5)
applied to suitable words in the
sense of composing, e.g. सूत्रं करोति |
सृञ्जयति, etc.: (6)applied to a verbal ]
noun ( कृदन्त ) in the sense of *nar-
rating' with the omission of the
krt affix and the karaka of the
verbal activity put in a suitable
case; e. g. कंसं घातयति for the sen-
tence कंसवधमाचष्ट or बलिं बन्धयति for
बलिबन्धमाचष्ट,or रात्रिं विवासयति, सूर्यमुद्वमयति,
पुष्येण योजयति etc.: cf. Kas. on P. III.
1.26. Roots ending in णिच् (णिजन्त)
take the conjugational endings of
both the Parasmaipada and the,
Atmanepada: cf. णचश्र P. I. 3.74.
They have perfect forms by the
addition of अाम् with a suitable
form of the perfect | tense of the
root कु, भू or अस् placed after अाम्,
the word ending with अाम् and the
verbal form after it being looked
upon as separate words e. g. कारयां
वकार कारयां चक्र etc.; cf P. III.1.35,
40. They have the aorist form,
with the substitution of the Vika-
raja चङ्क ( अ ) for च्लि before which
the root is reduplicated; e. g.
अचीकरत्, अबीभवत् etc.: cf. P.III.1.48,
VI.1.11 as also VII.4.93-97.
णिजन्त roots ending in णिच्; the term
is generally applied to causal bases
of roots. See णिच्.
णित् (1) an affix with the mute con-
.sonant ण् added to it to signify the
substitution of vpddhi for the pre-
ceding vowel or for the penulti-
mate अ or for the first vowel of
the word if the affix applied is a
taddhita affix; cf. P. VII.2.115-
1 17: e. g. अण्, ण, उणु, णि etc.: (2) an
affix not actually marked with the
mute letter ण् but looked upon as
such for the purpose of vrddhi;
e. g. the Sarvanamasthana affixes
after the words गी and सखि, cf. P.
VII.1.90, 92.
णित्त्व possession ofण as a mute lctter
for the purpose of vpddhi. See the
word णित् . _
णिनि krt affix इन् signifying vrddhi
(1) applied to the roots headed by
ब्रहृ ( i. e. the roots ग्रहृ, उद्वस्, स्था etc. )
' in the sense of an agent;e. g. ग्राही,
उद्वासी, स्थायी. cf. P. III.1.134; (2)
applied to the root हुन् preceded by
the word कुमार or √ीषे as उपपद: e. g.
कुमारघाती, इीर्षघाती, cf. P. III.2.51: (3)
applied to any root preceded by
a substantive as upapada in the
, sense of habit, or when compari-

णिनि
164
Uय
son or vow or frequency of action
is conveyed, or to the root मन, with |
a substantire as उपपद e. g- उणभेज,
इतीतर्भीजी, उदी, ध्वाङ्क्षरावीः स्थण्डिल्ाी,
अश्राद्धभेाजे: क्षीरपायिण'उशीनरा:; सौवीर-
पायिणे वहुका:: दर्शनीयमानी, ओभनीयमनी,
cf. P. III.2.78-82; (4) applied to
the root यज् preceded by a word
referring to the करण of यागफल as also
to the root हृन् preceded by a word
forming the object ( क्रमैन् ) of the
root हृन् , the words so formed re-
ferring to the past tense: e. g.
आ याज्ञ, पिङ्घाती, cf. P. III 2.85,
86; (5) applied to a root when the
word so formed refers to a kind of
necessary activity or to a debtor;
cf. अवश्यंकारी, इातंदाथी, सह्यनंदायी cf. P.
III.4. 169-170: (6) tad-affix इन् ,
causing wrddhi for the first vowel,
applied to the words क्यप and
क्रौढिक्र referring to ancient sages
named so, as also to words which
are the names of the pupils of
कलपि or of वैशम्पायन, as alsoto the
words शुनक्र, वाजसनेय etc. in the
sense of * students learning what
has been traditionally spoken by
those sages e. g. काश्यपिन:, ताण्डिनः,
हृरिद्रविण: दोनकिन:, वाजसनेयिन: etc.: cf
P. IV.3, 103 10 , 106; (7) applied
to words forming the names of
ancient sages who are the speakcrs
of ancient Brihtmaha works in
the sense of * pupils studying
those works' as also to words fortn-
ing the names ofsages who com-
posed old Kalpa works in the
sense of those कृल्प works: e. g.
भाछविन:, एतरयिणः | पैङ्गी कल्प: अरुणपरार्जी
कल्पः; cf Kas. on P. IV. 3.105: (8)
applied to the words पाराशयेand शिळा-
लिन् in the sense of*students read-
ing the Bhiksustras (of पाराशार्य) and
the Nata stºtras ( of शिलालिन् ) res-
pectively; e. g. पाराशरिणो भक्षव:, ईठा-
लिनी नटाः: cf Kas. on P. IV.3.110.
| णिलीप elision of the affix णि (णवृ.or णिङ्क
see above ) before an irdhadh-
uuka affix without tlac augrnent इ
( इट् ) prefixed to it; cf. णेरनिटि P.
VI. 4.51, and VI.4.62, 53, 54 also.
णुट् augment ण्, prefixed to the ini-
tial vowe! when it follows upon
the consonant ण् at the end of the
preceding word; c. g. सुगण्णीढाः for
सुगण् . ईश: cf P. VIII. 3.82.
णोपदेशा a root mentioned in the
Dhitupgha by Prini as beginn-
ing with णु which subscquently is
changed to न् ( by P. VI. 1.65)
in all the forms derived from the
roct; c. g. the roots णम, ण and
others.
In the case of these roots
the initial न् is again changed into
U aftcr a prefix like प्र or परा
having the letter र् in it and
having a vowel or a consonant of
the guttural or labial class inter-
vening between the lctter ， and
the letter न्: e. g. प्रणमति, प्रणयक्र: etc.
cf. KS. on P. VIII. 4.14.
णोपाद् a popular namc given to the
fourth pda of the scvcnth Adhy-
ya of Pininis Astidhyyi, which
begins with therulc र्ण चडयुपघायां
हृस्चः P. VII. 4.1.
ण्य tad.affix य (l) applied in the sense
offdescendant'asalso in a fcw other
senses, mentioncd in rulcs from
TV. 1. 92 to IV.3.168, applied to
the words दिति, आदति, अादित्य
and words with पति as the उत्तरपद
in a compound, c. g. दैत्य:, आदित्यः,
प्राजापस्यम् etc. cf.Kis.on P. IV. 84;
(2) applicd in the sense of a descen-
dant ( अपत्य ) applied to the words
कुरु,, गर्ग, रथकार, कथि, मति, दमै etc., e.g-
क्रीर्य:, गाग्र्यः etc. cf. K:, on P. IV.
I.15I ; (3) applied in the sense of
अपत्य or descendant to words end-
ing in सेना,to the word लक्षण and to
words in the sense of artisans, e.g-

यत्
ण्यत् krtya affix य
कारिषेण्यः, लाक्षण्य:, तान्तुवाय:, कौम्भकार्यः;
cf. Ks. on P.IV.1.152; (4) applied
in the Cituararthika senses to the
words संक्राळा, कम्पिल्थ, कश्मीर etc., e.g.
साङ्काद्यम्, कापिल्यम् etc. ; cf. Kas. on
P. IV. 2.80; (5) applied .o the
word परिषद् and optionally with
the affix ठक् to the word सेना in
the specified senses; e. g. परिषदं
सूमवेति, पूर्षुदि साधुर्वा वाद्यः, सेने समुति
सैन्य: सैनिकं वा: cf. Ks on P. IV.
44, 45, 101 ; (6) applied as a tad.
affix called * tadrja , to the word
कुरु and words beginning with न
e. g. कौरव्यः नैषध्यः; cf. Kis on P.
IV. 1.172; कुरवः, निषधा: etc. are the
nom. p]. forms.
which causes
vrddhi and which has the cir-
curnflex accent (1) applied to a
root ending with ऋ or any con-
sonant to form the pot. pass.parti-
ciple: e. g. क्राथेम्, हुयेम् , वाक्यम् etc.
cf. Ks on P. IV. 1.124; (2)
applied to a root ending in उ if a
necessity of the activity is to be
indicated, e. g. अबदयलाव्यम् , अवद्य-
प|ब्यम् cf. KS. on P. IV. 1.125;
(3) tad. affix य applied to the word
षण्मास्र optionally with यम् and ठ
affixes: e. g. षाण्मास्य:, षण्मास्यः, षाण्मा-
सिक्र:; cf Ks. on P. V. 1.84.
ण्युट् krt affix अन in the sense of
* skilled agent ' applied (1) to the
root मै to sing. e.g. गायनः, गायनी,
cf. Kas. on P. III 1.147, also
गाथक:, गाथिका by P. III. 1.146: (2)
to the root हृ (III. P. and III.A.
also) if * rice ' or * time ' be the
sense conveyed: e. g. हृायना व्रहृय:,
हृयनः संवत्सरः .cf. K. on P. III.
1.148. _
वि krt, affix ण्वि i. e. zero, causing
vrddhi, applied to the root भजू
and to सुहृ and बहु in Vedic Lite-
rature if the root is preceded by
165
त् the first
त्
any preposition ( उपसर्ग ) or a
, substantive as the upapada ; e. g.
अद्धभाक्, प्रभाक्, तुराषाट् , दित्यवाट्: cf. Kas.
on P. III, 2.62, 63, 64.
ण्विन् krt afix ब् or zero, seen applied
in Vedic Literature to the root
बहु preceded by श्वत, to वंस् preced-
ed by उक्थ, to दादू preceded by
पुरट् and to यज्ञ preceded by अब.
e. g. श्वतवाँ इन्द्र:, उक्थशा यज्ञमान:, पुरोडाः,
अचयः: cf Kas. on P. III. 2.7 ], 72.
एबुच्( krt affix अक्र seen always with
the fem. affix अा applied to a root
when the sense conveyed is * a
turrः * or * a deserving thing ? or
* debt ' or * occurrence:' e. g.
भवतः ूाथिका, अर्हति भवान् इक्षुभक्षिकाम्,
ओदनभेञ्जिकां धारयसि, इक्षुभक्षिकां उदपादि ;
cf Kas. on P. III. 3.1 ] 1.
ण्वुल् (1) a very general kt affix
अक्र, causing vrddhi and acute
accent to the vowel preceding the
afix, applied to a root optionally
with तृ (i. e. तृड् ) in the sense of
an agent e. g केरकः हारकः also कत,
हृतां ; Cf P. III. 1.33; (2) krt. affix
अक्र applied optionally with the
affix तुम् to a root when it refers
to an action for which another
action is mentioned by the princi-
pal verb; e. g. भोजकं व्रजति .or भेोक्तुं
व्रजति: cf. Kas. on तुमुन्ण्वुलौ क्रियायां
क्रियार्थायाम्*; P. III. 3.10; (3) krt
affix अक, necessarily accompanied
by the fem. affix अा added to it,
applied to a root if the sense
given by the wo: d so formed is
the name of a disease or a proper
noun or a narration or a query ;
e. g. प्रवाहृिक्रा, प्रच्छार्दका, इलभञ्जिक्रा,
तालभञ्जिक्रा, कारिक, cf. Kas. on P.
III. 3.108, ,09, 10.
त
consonant of the

166
dental class of consonants which
has got the properties श्वासानुप्रदान,
अचेष, विवृतकण्ठत्व and अल्पप्राणत्व. When
uscd as a.mute letter by Panini, त्
signifies the Svarita accent of the
vowel of that affix or so, which is
marked with it: e. g. कार्यम्, ह्यायेम्,
पयस्यम् cf. P. VI.1.185. When appi-
ed to a vowel at its end, त् signifi-
is only the vowel of that grade
only, possessed by such of its vari-
cties which reguire the same time
for their utterance as the vowel
marked wtih त् , e. g. अात् stands
for अा with any of the three accents
as also pure or nasalised; अात् does
not include ओ or अ 3 cf. तपरस्तत्कालस्य
P. I. 1. 70. The use of the indi-
catory mute त् for the above
purpose is seen also in the Pratis
akhya works; cf. V. Pr. I. 114
R. T. 234.
त ( 1) personal ending of the third
pers sing. Atm: cf. P. III. 4.78,
which is changed to ते in the per-
fect tense and omitted after the
substitute चिण् for लि in the aorist:
cf. P.VI.4.04: (2) personal ending
substituted for the affix थ of the
Paras. 2nd pers. pl. in the im-
perative, imperfect, potential,
benedictive, aorist and condition-
al for which, तात्, तन and थन are
substituted in Vedic Literature,
and also for f in case a repetition
of an action is meant: cf. P. III.
" 4. 85, 10l as also VII. 1. 44, 45
and III. 4. 2-5. cf P. III. 4. 85
and III. 4. 10I ; (3) tad. afix त
applied to the words कम् and इाम्
e. g. कन्तः, दन्त:, cf. P. V. 2. 138:
(*) tad. affix त applied to दातुं
when दद्यात् is changed to इ: cf.
दशानां दद्यातां प्राभवः तश्र प्रत्ययः	द्इ दइत:
परिमाणमस्य संधक्ष्य शतम्, Ks. on P. V.
l. 59; (5) .general term for the
affix क्त of the past pass. part, in |
तण्णु
तण्!
*र्
popular use: (6) a technical term
for the past participle affixes (त) क्त
and तवत् ( क्तवतु ) called निष्ठा by
Pmini; cf. P. I.1.26; the term त is
used for निष्ठI in the.jainendra Vya-
kararna.
तकार the consonant त्, the vowel अ
and the word कार being placed af-
ter it for facitity in understanding;
cf. T. Pr. I. 17, 2!.
तक्षशिलादि a class of words headed
by तक्षशिला to which the taddhita
affix अ ( अतः ) is added in the
sense of a native place or a domi-
cile'. The word so formed has the
acute accent on its first vowel;
e. g. ताक्ष्ल: वात्सोद्वरण:: cf. KS. on
P. IV. 3.93.
तङ्क (1) a short term used for the nine
personal endings of the Atmane-
pada viz. त,अाताम्...माहृड् which are
themselyes termed Atmanepada;
cf. तडनौ अात्मनेपदम् P. 1.4. 100 (2)
the personalending त of the 2nd
pers. pl. (substituted for थ by III.4
101) looked upon as तङ्क sometimes,
when it is lengthencd in the Vedic
Literature: cf. तडिति थांददास्य डित्त्रपक्ष
ग्रहुणम् । भरता जातवेदसम् Kas. on P.
VI. 3. 133.
तच्छीलादि the triad of senses तच्छील्,
तद्धर्म and तत्साधुकारिन् possessed by
the agent of an action, in conncc-
tion with which the affixes तृन् ,
इष्णुच् etc. are prescribed (cf P.III.
2.184 etc.) which (affixes) hence
are called ताच्छीलिक्र: cf. अयं तच्छीला-
दिष्वर्थेषु तृन् विधीयत, M. Bh. on P. III.
2.146, e. g. कर्ता कटान्.
ए ancient term for संज्ञा and छन्दस्
used by the Vartikakara: cf. बहुलं
तणीति वक्तव्यम् | क्रिमिदे तणीते ! ्
श्रेहुणम् , M. Bh. on P. II. 4.54 Vart.
11: IHI. 2.8 Vart. 2; IV. 1.52. Vrt.
3.

तंत्क्राळ 167
तत्काळ reguiring the same time for
utterance as for example one
matra for short vowels, two for
long ones and three for protracted
ones, although those vowels are
nasalised or pure, or acute, grave
or circumflex. See the word तपर.
तत्कालप्राप्तिक occurring or presenting
itself at the same time or simul-
taneously.
तच्चचन्द्र name of a commentary on
Ramacandras Prakriyakaumud.
तत्त्वबोधिनी name of the well-known
commentary on Bhattoj's Sidd-
hnta Kaumudi written by his
pupil ]णेanendrasarasvat at Be-
nares. Out of the several commne-
taries on the Siddhantakaumudi,
the Tattvabodhin is looked upon
as the most authoritative and at
the same time very scholarly.
त्वविमर्शिनी name of a commentary
on the Kasikavrtti by a gramma-
rian named Upamanyu in the
beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury A. D.
तत्त्वाद्र्श name of a commentary on
the Paribhasendusekhara written
by M. M. Vasudev Shastri Abh-
yankar in 1889 A. D. The com-
mentary is more critical than ex-
planatory,wherein the auothor has
given the purpose and the gist of
the important Paribhass and has
brought out clearly the differences
between the school of Bhattoj and
the school of Nagesa in several
important matters.
तत्पुरुष name of an important kind of
compound words similar to the
compound word तत्पुरुष i.e. ( तस्य
पुरुषः ), and hence chosen as the
name of such compounds by anci-
ent grammarians before Pahimi.
Panini has not defined the term
with a view to including .such
compounds as would be covered
by the definition. He has mention-
ed the term तत्पुरुष in II.1.22 as
Adhikara and on its strength dire-
cted that all compounds mention-
ed or prescribed thereafter upto
Sutra II.2.22 be called तत्पुरुष. No
definite number of the sub-divi-
sions ofतत्पुरुष is given:but from the
nature of compounds included in
the तत्पुरुष-अधिकार, the sub-divisions !
विभक्तितत्पुरुष cf. P.II.1.24 to 48,
समानाधिकरणतत्पुरुष cf. P. II.1.49 to 72
(called by the name कर्मधारय; acc.to
P.I. 2. 42), संख्यातत्पुरुष (called द्विगु by
P.II.1.52), अबयत्रतत्पुरुष or एकदेशीतत्पुरुष
cf. P.II.2.1-3, ब्यधिकरणतत्पुरुष cf. P.
II 2.5, नञ्तत्पुरुष cf. P.II.2.6, उपप-
दत्पुरुष cf. P. II.2.19, प्रादितत्पुरुष cf.
P.II.2 18 and णमुल्तत्पुरुष cf.P.II.2.20
are found mentioned in the com-:
mentary literature on standard
classical works. Besides these, a
peculiar tatpurusa compound
mentioned by'Panini in II.1.72, is
popularly called मयूरव्यंसक्रादिसमास.
Paini has defined only two out
, 9f thesevarieties viz. द्विगु as संख्यापूर्वं
द्विगुः P.II. 1.23, and कंर्मधारय as
तत्पुरुषः समानाधिकरणं: कर्मधारयः P. I.2.42.
TheMahabhasyakra has described
तत्पुरुष as उत्तरपदार्थप्रधानस्तत्पुरुषः: cf.
M.Bh. on II.1.6, II.1.20, II.].49,
etc., and as a consequence it
follows that the gender of the
tatpurusa compound word is that
of the last member of the compo-
und; cf. परवाञ्छङ्ग द्वन्द्वतत्पुरुषयैा: P. Ii.4.
26; cf also तत्पुरुषश्चापि कः परवळिङ्क
प्रयेोजयति | यः पूर्वपदार्थप्रधेानः एकदद्भिासमासः
अर्धपिप्पलीति ' यो द्युत्तरपदार्थप्रधानेौ देवकृतं
तस्य परवळिङ्गम्, M. Bh. on II.4.26.
Sometimes, the compouud gets a
gender different from that of the
last word; cf. P.II.4.19-31, The
tatpuru5a compound is optional as
generally all compounds are,

तद्न्ताबोध
depending as they do uPon the
desire of the speaker. Some tat-
purusa compounds such as the
प्रैतदित्पुरुष or उपपदतत्पुरुष are called
नित्य and hence their constitutent
words, with the case affixes appli-
ed to them, are not noticed Sepa-
rately: cf. P.II.2.18,19, In some
cases अ as a compound-ending
( समासान्त ) is added: e.g. राजबुर;
नंन्दीपुरम् ; cf. P. V.4.74; in_some
cases अच् ( अ ) is added: cf. P.V-?
75 o 87: while in some other
cases टच् ( अ ) is added, the mute
letter ट्signifying the addition of
डू ( ई) in the feminine gender;
cf.P.V.4. 91-1 12. For details See
p.p. 270-273 Mahabhasya Vol.VII
ptiblished by the D. E. Society,
Poona..
तदन्तविाघ a peculiar feature in the
interpretation of the rules of
Panini, laid down by the author
of the Sutras himself by virtue of
which an adjectival word, duali-
fying its principal word, does not
denote itself, but something end-
ing with it also; cf. यन विधिस्तदन्तस्य
P.I.1.72.This feature is principally
noticed in the case of general
words or adhikaras which are put in
a particular rule, but which Occur
in a large number of subsequent
rules for instance, the word प्राति-
पादेकात्, put in P.IV.1.1, is valid in
every rule upto the end of
chapter V and the words अत:,
उतः, यञ्ज: etc. mean अद्न्ताद् , उदन्तात् ,
यञ्मन्तात् etc. Similarly the words
धातोः (P.III.1.91) and अङ्गस्य (P.VI.
4.1 ) occurring in a number of
subsequent rules have the adjecti-
val words to them, which are
mentioned in subsequent rules,
denoting not cnly those words,but
words ending with them. In a
large number of cases this feature
of तदन्तविधि is not desirable, as it,
goes againstarriving at the desired
forms, and exceptions deduced
from Panini's rules are laid down
by the Varttikakra and latergram-
marans; cf. Par. Sek. Pari. 16,23,
31 : also Mahbhasya on P.I.1.72.
तद्ाादीबाघ a convention similar to the
तदन्तविधि of Panini,laid down by the
Varttikakara laying down that in
case an operation is prescribed for
something followed by a single
letter, that single letter should be
taken to mean a word beginning
with that single letter: cf. यस्मिन्विधि-
स्तदादावल्ग्रहणे P.I.1.72 Vart. 29: Par.
Sek. Pari. 33.
तद्गुणसंविज्ञान lit. connection with
what is denoted by the constituent
members; the word refers to ' a
kind of Bahuvrihi compound
where the object denoted by the
compound includes also what is
denoted by the constituent
members of the compound: e g-
the compound word सर्वादि in the ;
rule सर्वादीनि सर्वनामानि includes the
word सर्वे among the words विश्व, उभय
and others, which alone form the
अन्यपदर्थे or the external thing and
not merely the external object as
mentioned in Pamini's ruleअनेकमन्य्-
मपदार्थे (P.II. 2. 24): cf. भवति बहुव्रीहेो
तद्गुणसंविज्ञानमपि | तद्यथा ] चित्रवाससमानृय
लैर्हतोष्णीषा ऋत्विजः प्रचरन्ति | तद्गुणः आनीयते
तद्गुणाश्च प्रचरन्ति M.Bh. on I.1.27F9
details cf. Mahjbhsya on P.1.1.27
as also Par. Sek. Pari. 77.
तद्गुणीभूत lit. made subordinated to
the principal factor); completely
included so as to form a portion
The word is used in connection with
augments which, when added to.a
wofd are completely included in
that word, and, in fact, form a
part of the word: cf यदागमास्तद्भुणी-

तद्धित
भूतास्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यन्तं P r. Sek. Pari. 11.
तद्धित a term of the ancient pre-
Paninian grammarians used by
Phini just like सर्वनामन् or अव्यय
without giving any specific defini-
tion of it. The term occurs in the
Nirukta of Yaska and the Waja-
saneyi-Pratisakhya ; . cf. . अथ ताद्व-
तसमासेषु एकपवेसु वनैकपर्वसु पूर्वे पूर्वमपरमपरं
प्रविभज्य निवृयात्	द्ण्डय: पुरुषे:	दण्डमर्ह-
तीति वा, दण्डन संपद्यत इति वं Nir. II.2;
also cf. तिङ्कृत्तद्धितचतुथ्यसमासा: इाब्दमयम्
Vaj Prati.I. 27. It is to be noted
that the word तद्वत is used by the
ancient grammarians in the sense
of a word derived from a substan-
tive ( प्रातिपादक ) by the application
of suffixes like अ, यत् etc., and not
in the sense of words derived from
roots by affixes like अन, ति etc. which
were termed नामकर्ण, as possibly
contrasted with the word ताद्धित
used by Yaska in II. 5. Panini has
used the word तद्धित not for words,
but for the suffixes which are add-
ed to form such words at all
places (e. g. in I. 1.38, IV.1.17,
76, WI.1.6l etc.). in fact, he has
begun the enumeration of taddhita
affixes with the rule तद्धिता: (P.IV.1.
76) by putting the term तद्धित for
affixes such as ति, ष्यङ्क, अण् Otc.
which are mentioned thereafter.
In his rule कृत्तद्धितसमासाश्च and in the
Varttika समासकृत्तद्धिताव्यय्(I.4.1Vrt.
41) which are similar to V.Pr.1. 27
quoted above the word तद्धित
appears to be actually used for
words derived from nouns by
secondary affixes, along with the
word कृत् which also means words
derived from roots, although com-
mentators have explained there
the terms क्त् and तद्धित for कृदन्त and
तद्धितान्त. The term तद्वित is evidently
echoed in the Sutra तस्मै हितम् which,
although it is not the first Sutra
22
169
तद्भावित
of the taddhita section, may imply
that there were possibly long lists
ofsecondary nouns with the senses
of secondary suffixes, and तद्धित was
perhaps,the first sense given there.
The number of taddhita suffixes
mentioned by Panini is quite
a large one; there are in fact
lll0 rules given in the taddhita
section covering almost two
Adhyyas viz. from P. IV. 1.76
to the end of the fifth Adhyaya.
The main sub-divisions of taddhita
affixes mentioned by commentators
are, Apatyadyarthaka (IV. 1.92 to
178), Raktadyarthaka (IV.2.1 to
91), Saisika {IV.2. 92 to IV.3.133),
Pragdivyatya (IV. 3 134 to 168),
Pragvahatya (IV.4.1 to IV.4.74),
Pragghitiya (IV.4.75 to IV.4.109),
Arhya (V.1.1 to 71),Thafadhikara-
stha (V. 1.72 to V. 1.1 14), Bhva-
karmarthaka (V. 1.115 to V.1.136),
Pacamika (V. 2.1 to V. 2.93),
Matvarthya (V. 2.94 to V. 2.
140), Vibhaktisarnjaka (V. 3.1 to
V. 3.26) and Svarthika (V. 3.27 to
V. 4.160). The samsanta affixes
(V.4.68 to V.4.160) can be includ-
ed in the Svirthika affixes.
तद्धितकीझा a work on the taddhita
section written by Siromani Bhat्-
carya, who has also written
तिडन्तइिारोमणि.
तञ्ज[च the essence, also called त्व: cf.
येस्य गुणान्तरेष्वपि प्रादुर्भवत्सु तत्त्वं न बहुन्यते
तद् द्रव्यम् | किं पुनस्तत्त्वम् | तद्भावस्तत्त्वम् M.
Bh. on P.V.1.1 19.
तंद्रावत produced or brought into
being by some grammatical opera-
tion such as the vowel आ in दक्षि,
कारक्र, अकार्षीत् etc. by the substitu-
tion of वृद्धि, as contrasted with the
original अा in ग्राम, विघान इाला, माला
etc.: cf. किं पुनरिदं तद्भावितग्रहृणं वृद्धिरित्येवं
य आक्रूरक्रारंकारा भाव्यन्ते तेषां ग्रहृणमाहे-
स्विदादैज्मात्रस्य M.Bh. on I. 1.1.

तदाज्ञ
170 तपरकरण
तद्राज the taddhita affixes अञ्,अण्,क्रयङ्क,
ण्य्, as also इ, दृ, युद्, एय्, डेयूगु nd
य् given in the rules of Panini IV.
1.168-174 and V.3. 112-1 19. They
are called तद्रज as they are applied
to such words as mean both the
country and the warrior race or
clan ( क्षत्त्रिय ): cf. तद्राज्ञमाचक्षाण: तद्राज:
S. K. on P. IV.l.:68. The pecu-
liar feature of these tadrja affixes
is that they are omitted when the
word to which they have been app-
lied is used in the plural number;
e. g. पेक्ष्वाकः, एक्ष्वाक्रो, इक्ष्वाकवः; simi-
larly इक्ष्वाकूणाम्: cf. P.II.4.62.
तद्वद (l) as above,similarly;the words
देठे तद्वतू (the rest as above) are fre-
guently seen used by commenta-
tors; (2) the tad. afix वत् in the
sense of possession and not in the
sense of measure etc. cf. तद्वति तद्धित
न्यायसेहितं चेत् W.Pr.V.8.
तद्वदतिदेशा treatment of something as
that which is not that e. g the
treatment of affixes not marked
with mute f or / as marked with
f even though they are not actual-
ly marked that way, cf. P. I. 2.1-
?; also cf तद्वदतिदेशेSकद्विधिप्रसङ्गः P. I.
2.1 Vart 4.
तन (1) personal ending for त of the
sccod pers.pl. Parasmaipada in
the imperative in Vedic Litera-
tur% 9.g डड्टन for जुषत cf. K5.
On P VII. 1.45; (2) fad. affixes
ठ and टयुलु i.e. अन which, with the
augrnent , in effect becomes
ः 9 gः सायंतन, चिरंतन, etc.: cf. P.
IV. 3.28.
तन' Personal ending for त of ha
Second Pers.. pl. e. g. दधातन for
↑. Cf Ks on P. VII. 1.45. See
सन.
् 3 word frequently used in tha
Mahabhasyain the sense of < !
tended ' or विवक्षित. The word !
पsed always in the neuter gender
like प्रमाणम्: cf. तन्त्रं तरनिर्दढाः M. Bh.
on P. I. 2.33, II. 2.34, नात्र लि.
दस्तन्त्रम् On P. I. 2.39, III.3.38, II.
#-21,IV-1.92 etc. The word is also
explained in the sense of impor.
tant'.
तन्त्रप्रदीप name of the learned com-
mentary_written by मैत्रयरक्षित, a
famous Buddhist grammarian of
the 12th century A. D. on the
कृथििक्रव्रिवृरूपञ्जिक्रा ( न्यास ) of Jinen.
drabuddhi, The work is available
at Present only in a manuscript
forms and that too in fragments.
Many later scholars have c6pious
ly guoted from this work. The
name of the work viz. तन्त्रप्रदीप :
rarely mentioned but the name
9 the author is mentioned as राक्षत,
मैत्रेय or even मैत्रेयराक्षत. Thera'a
two commentaries on the तन्त्रप्रदीप
named उद्द्योतनप्रभा and आलेक्,
तनादै a class of roots headed by the
root तन्, which is popularly caII-
cd as the eighth conjugation to
which the conjggational sign उ
is added: e.gः तनोतेि, करोति, कुतैः cf.
P. II. 4.79: III. 1.79.
तनीत्यादि a class of words which is
the same as तनादि: cf. P. VI. 4.37.
See तनादेि,
तन्नामिकाण् the tad. affix अण् prescrib-
ed by the rule अवृद्धाभ्यो'नदीमानुष-
भ्यरतलामिकाभ्यः P. IV. 1.113: cf. M.
Bh. on P. IV. 1.1I4,
तए (I) tad. affix त added to the
words पर्वेन् and मरुत् to form the
words पर्वतः and मरुतः: cf. P. V.
2.122 Wart. 10 (2) personal end-
ing in Wedic Literature substitut-
cd for त of the impera sec. pers.
pl. e. g. श्|ुणेोत ग्रावाणः cf. K. on
P. WII. 1.45.
तपरकरण addition of the mute letter
＾ fter a vowel to signify the in-

तम्
clusion of only such varieties of
the vowel as take the same time
for their utterance as the vowel
marked with त्: cf. P. I. 1.70.
See त्.
तम personal ending तम् substituted
for थ¶ in the impera. imperf.
potential, benedictive, aorist and
conditional: cf. P. III. 4.85, 101.
तम common term for the tad. affixes
तमट् and तमप्.
तमद् tad. affix तम added optionally
with the affix डट् ( अ ) to विंदति,
त्रिं|ेत् etc., as also to words ending
171
with them, in the sense of पूरण
(completion), and necessarily (नित्यं)
to the words इत, सहृख, षष्टि, सतति etc.
e. g. एकविंशातितम: एकधिंढाः, त्रिंशात्तम:,
त्रिंदा:, इाततमः, षष्ठितम:, विंझी, त्रिंकॊंीिं etc.;
cf. KS. on V. 2.56-58.
तमप् tad. affix तम added without a
change of sense, i. e. in the sense
of the base itself to noun bases
possessing the sense of excellence,
as also to verbal forms showing
| excellence: e. g. अढयतमः, दर्शनीयतमः,
श्रष्ठतमः, पचतितमाम् cf. Kas on P. V.
3.55-56. The affix तमप् is termed
घ also; cf. P. I. 1.22.
तय tad. affix तयप् applied to a nu-
' meral ( संख्या ) in the sense of
अवयविन or * possessed of parts';
e. g. पञ्च अवयवा अस्य पञ्चतयम् , ददातयम् ,
चतुष्टयं: cf. K8. on P. V. 2.42. अय
is ' substituted for तय optionally
atter the numerals द्वि and त्रि and
necessarily after उभ: cf. P. V.
2.43-44.
तयप् tad. afix तय. See तय्.
द， tad. affix तरप् added to bases
showing excellence ( अतिङायन )
when the excellence shown is
between two persons: e. g. अनयोः
सुकुमारतर: _ सुकुमारतरा, पचतितराम्: cf.
Sई. 9n P. V.3.57. The affix तरप् is
called घ just like तमप्: cf P.I. 1.22.|
तव्यत्
तरप् tad. affix तर. See तर.
तल्ट् tad, affix त (l) added in the
8ense of collection ( समूह ) to the
words ग्राम, जन, बन्धु and सहाय and
गज also, e. g. ग्रामता, जनत[ etc (2)
added in the sense of the nature
of a thing' ( भाव ) along with the
affix त्व optionally, as also option-
ally along with the affixes इमन्, यद्
etc. given in P. V. 1.122 to .136
e, g. अश्वत्वम् , अश्वता;. अपतित्वम्
अपातता : वृधुत्वम् , पृथुता, प्रथिमा ; |्ता
शुकुत्वम् , ह्रीक्यम् , द्युामा: etc., cf Ka5.
on P, V. 1.119 to 136. Words end-
ing with the affix तल् are always
declined in the feminine gender
with the fem. affix अा ( टुप् ) add-
ed to theri,: ( f. तलन्तः (दाब्द: खित्रयाम् )
Lingamusasana 17.
तवर्ग the class of dental consonants
viz. त्, श्र, द्, ध् and न्: cf विभक्तौ
तवर्गप्रतिषेधsतद्धितेP.I 3,4 Vart. 1.
तचेड् krt affix त् for the infinitive
affix तुम् in Vedic Literature: e.g.
दढमे मासि सूतवे: cf. P.III 4.9.
तवेन् krt affix तव for the infinitive affix
तुम् in Vedic Literature: e.g. गन्तव,
क्रतैवे, हृतैवे: cf. P.III. 4.9.
तवै (1) krt affix तवै for the infinitive
affix तुम् in Vedic Literature. The
affix तवै has a peculiarity of accent,
namely that the word ending in तवै
has got both the initial and end-
ing vowels accented acute (उदात्त ) ;
e.g. सोममिन्द्राय पातवै, हृर्षसे दातवा उ: cf.
P.III.4.9 and VI. 1.200; (2)
krtya affix in Vedic Literature,
e. g, परिधातवै for परिधातव्यम्: cf Kas.
on P. III. 4.14.
तवय krtya affix applied to a root to
form the pot.pass. part, e.g. कर्तव्यम् ;
cf. Kas. on P.III.1.96.
तव्यत् krtya affix तव्य applied to a
root to form the pot. pass. part.;
the affix तब्यत् has the circumflex

तस्
172 .
तातल्
accent on the last syllable: e.g.
कतैक्यम् cf. Ks on P. III. ! . 96.
तस्म् (1) personal ending of the third
pers. dual Parasmaipada substitu-
ted technically for ♥ (लकार); cf P.
III.4.78; (2) tad. affix तस् ( तास or
तसिल् ). See तसि and तसिल्.
तसि (1) tad.affix तस्showing direction
by means of a thing e.g. वृक्षमूलत:,
हिमवतः: cf. Ks on P.IV.3.114,15:
(2) tad.affix त् applied in the sense
of the abl. case and substituted for
the abl. case affix: e g, ग्रामतः अाग-
छति, चेरतो विभति:sometimes the affix
isapplied instead of the instrumen-
tal or the genitive case also. e. g.
वृत्तुत: न व्यथते for वृतन न व्यथते: देवं
. अर्जुनतः अभवन् , for अर्जुनस्य पक्षे अभवंन् cf.
Kas, on P.V.4.44-49,
तासल् (1) tad. affix तस् added to pro-
nouns from सवै upto द्वि, to the
pronoun किम् and after परि and अभि:
e.g. कुत:; यतः, ततः, अभितः; cf Ks.on
P.V.3. 7 to 9.
तासलादि a class of taddhita affixes
headed by the affix तसु ( तसिल् ) as
given by Panini in his stras from
पञ्चम्यास्तस P. V. 3, 7. upto संख्यायाः
क्रियाभ्यावृत्तिगणने कृत्वसुच् V.3.17: cf. P.
VI-3-36. The words ending with
the affixes from तास् in P.V.3.7
upto पृदाप् in P.V.3.47 (excluding
प्रा|्) become indeclinables: cf
Ks on P.I.1.38.
ता (I) a technical term for the genitive
case affix used in the.jainendra
Vyakarana: (2) the tad. affix तलु
which is popularly called ता as
thenouns ending in त i. e. त are
declined in the fem. gender with
the fem. affix अा added to them,
ताच्छब्द्य (I) use of a word for that
word (of which the sense has been
" conveyed); the expression तादथ्र्यी-
ताच्छब्द्यम् is often used by gramma-
' rians just like a Paribhi: cf. अस्ति
तादथ्र्यात्ताच्छब्द्यम् बहुव्रीह्यर्थानि पदानि बहुव्रीहि-
रिते M. Bh. on P. I.1.29: similarly
तृतीयासमासः for तृतीयार्थानि पदानि M.Bh.
on P.I.1.30 or समासार्थ इास्त्रं समास:
M. Bh. on P.I. 2.43; (2) use of a
word for that word of which there
is the vicinity; cf. अथवा साहृचर्यात्
ताच्छब्द्यं भविष्यति ' कालसहृचरितो वर्णः वर्णपिं
काल एव; M. Bh. on P. I.2.27 where
the letter उ is taken in the sense
of time required for its utterance,
the reason being that sound and
time go together;cf also M.Bh. on
P.I.2. 70, IV. 3.48, V. 2. 79: (3)
use of a word for that which resi-
des there; cf. तात्स्थ्यात्ताच्छब्द्यं भविष्यति
M.Bh. on V, 4.50 Vrt. 8. At al|
the above places, the use of one
word for another is by Laksa.
ताच्छीलिक्र prescribed in the sense of
"habituated'; a term used in con-
nection with all affixes prescribed
in the triad of senses viz. ताच्छील्य,
तद्धिम्ये, तत्साधुकारित्व in Sutras from P:
III.2.134 to 180; cf. तच्छीलिकेषु
बसरूपविधिनास्ति P. III.2.146 Vart. 3,
Par. Sek, Pari. 67.
तत् (1) the same as तातङ्क substituted
for तु and हृि of the imperative sec.
and third sing. Parasmaipada; cf.
P. VII. 1.35: (2) substitute तात् for
त of the imperative 2nd pl. in
Vedic Literature: e.g. गात्रं गात्रमस्यामूनं
क्णुतात् cf. Ks on P. VII.1.44.
तातङ्क the affix तात्. See तात् (1).
तातिट् tad. affix ताति in the very
sense of the word to which it is
applied occurring in Vedic Litera-
ture after the words सर्व and देव, as
also after शिव, इम् and अरिट in the
sense of bringing about and in
the sense of भाव (presence) after
the same words शिव, झाम् and अरिष्ट:
e.g. सर्वतातिः, देवतातिः, दि्वतांतिः etc. cf.
P.IV.4.142-144. _

तात्पये
तात्पर्य (1) repetition of action: cf .
तात्पर्यमभीक्ष्ण्यं पौनःपुन्यमसवा Kas.on III. !
2.8l also तात्पर्यमसिवा 1 द्रब्य ब्यानं:, !
क्रियायामासेत्रा ' (2)forenost considera- ;
Bh;"र्वेईईओसेतैिर्त्स्येन्दः |
संनिधापितो भवति Kas. on P.WII.2.59; '
(3) purport (of a sentence), signi- |
ficance intention: cf. सर्वदास्त्रोपक्ररिक- !
मति तत्तात्पर्यम् Par. Sek. Pari. 2, 3. |
तथाभाव्य name given to the grave
(अनुदात्त) vowel which is अवग्रहं i.e. |
which occurs at the end of the ;
first member of a compound and !
which is placed between two acute ;
vowels i.e. is preceded by and
followed by an acute vowel; e.g.
तनुSनप्त्रे, तनूSनपत्: cf. उद्द्यन्ते न्यवग्र-
हृस्तंाथाभाढयः 1 V.Pr.I.120. The tath-
abhavya vowel is recited as a
kampa ( कम्प ) ; cf. तथा चेद्भक्तमौ- !
ज्जिह्यायेनकैर्माध्यन्दिनमतानुसारिभि:- * अवग्रहे
यदा नन्वि उचयेतैर्मध्यत: क्कचित् | तथाभाब्येो
भवैत्कम्पस्तन्नेत्रे निदर्शनम् *. Some Vedic
scholars hold the view that the
ताथदभाब्य vowel is not a grave
( अनुदात्त ) vowel, but it is a kind of
स्वरित or circumflex vowel. Strictly
according to Panini **an anudatta
following upon an udatta becomes
Svarita*: cf. P.VIII. 4 66, V.Pr.
IV. 1.138: cf also R.Pr.III. 16.
तादथ्र्य (l) the nature of being meant
for another : cf. न्वतुथींविधाने तादथ्र्य
उपसंख्यानम् , यूपाय दारु M. Bh. on P.
II.3.13; (2) meant for another: cf.
तदथे एवृ तादथ्र्यम् | चातुर्वण्र्यादित्वात् ष्यञ् !
् इदम् अग्दिवत्यम् | तादथ्र्यं यत् |
cf. Kas. on P. V. 4.24 (3) being
possessed of the same sense: cf.
तादथ्यात्ताच्छब्द्यम्. See तान्छब्द्य.
तादात्म्य possession of the same nature:
तत्स्वभावता;; cf. सुबामन्त्रित पराङ्गवत्स्वरे |
तादात्म्यातिदेशेीयम् Kas. on P.II. 1.2.
ताद्धम्ये being possessed of the same
property; cf. चतुार्मः प्रकारैरतस्मिन्स इत्य- [ !
173
तद्वति तात्स्थ्यात्ताद्धम्र्यात्तत्सामीप्यात्तत्साह्यवर्या-
तारानाथ
ति	M. Bh. on IV. 1.48 Vºrt- *-
ताद्रूप्य restoration to, or resumption ?
he same form by the fule _9
S:hnivadbhiva, prescribed in F!:
1.56, called रूपातैर्दा as contrasteg
wit}(क्षयतिदृढ: cf. नह्य तादूयमतिदि्यते
M. Bh. on VI. 1.85 Vart. 20.
तान one uniform accent Or ton99
एकश्रुति, as observed at the time of
sacrifices in the case of the recital
of the hymns cf. तानलक्षणमेकं स्वरमाई-
ज्ञक्रणि V. Pr. I.130; cf also P. 1.
2.34.
तान्द्राक्ष a root of the tanवdi class
of roots (8th conjugation)-
ताम personal ending substituted for
तस् of the 3rd pers, dual in the
imperative, imperfect, potential,
benedictive, aorist and condi-
tional: cf. P. III.4.85, 101.
तार ( 1) elevated, high : a place for
the production of words; cf. T.Pr.
XVII. 11 : (2) recital in a high
tone which is recommended in
the evening time; cf. तारं तु विद्यात्सवने
तृतीय, इिरोगतं तत्र सदा प्रयेश्ाज्यम् com. on
T. Pr. XXIII. 12.
तारकादि a class of words headed by
the word तारका and containing
prominently the words पुष्प, कण्टक,
मुकुल, कुसुम, पछव, बुभुक्षा, ज्वर् and
many others mumbering more than
ninety, to which the taddhita affix
इत (इतच्) is added in the sense of
*containing'. As this class, called
तारकादि, is looked upon as आकृतिगण,
nouns with इत added at their end,
are supposed to be included in it:
cf. P. V. 2.36.
तारानाथ called तर्कवाचस्पति: a Bengali
modern Sanskrit scholar and gra-
mmarian of the nineteenth century
who has written a commentary
called Saral on the Siddhanta
Kaumudi. He has edited many

तालव्य
174
_K &'
ांतंडथ
important Sanskrit works consist-
ing of many kosas.
तालव्य lit. produced from ताळ the
part below the tongue the vowel
इ, चवरी, य and ， are called तालव्य,
palatal letters: cf इच्यारुतालौ V.Pr.
I. 66. These letters are formed
upon the palate by the middle
part of the tongue; cf. R.Pr. 1.42,
R.Pr. II.36.
तालादि a small class of eight words to |
which the affix अ ( अण् ) is added
in the sense of a product or a
part e.g. तालं धनुः, बार्हणम्, etc.;
_ cf. KS, on P. IW. 3, 152.
तळि palate: cf. ताळशाब्दन जिह्वाया अधस्तन-
प्रदद्द उच्यते | स इवर्णस्य स्थानम् ， जिह्वामध्यं
करणम्	cf. T. Pr. II. 22.
तास् conjugational sign or Wikarana
(तासि) added to a root in the first
future before the personal endings
which become accented grave
(अनुदात्त); cf. P.VI.1.186; it has the
augment इ prefixed, if the root, to
which it is added, isस्ट्, cf. P. VI.
4. 62.
तसि the Wikarama तानु. See तासु.
ते (l) personal ending तिप् of the 3rd
pers. sing.; (2) common term for
the krt affixes क्तिन् and क्तिढ as
also for the updi affix ति; see
क्तिन् and क्तिच्; (3) fem. affix ति
added to the word युवन्. e. g.
युवति: cf. P. IV. 1.77; (4) tad. affix
ति as found in the words पङ्क्ति and
विंदात cf Ks. on P.V.1.59; (5) tad.
affix added to the word पक्ष in the
sense of "a root,' and to the words
कम् and ढाम् in the sense of posses-
sion (मत्वर्थं ); e.g. पक्षति:, कन्ति:, ज्ञाान्त:,
cf. Kई, on P. V.2.25, 138: (6) a
technical term for the term गति in
. Panini's grammar, cf. उपसर्गाः क्रिया-
योगे: गतिश्च P. 1.4.59, 60. The term
ति for गति is used in the Jainendra
: Wyakarana. _
तिककितवादि a class of compound
words headed by the dvandva
compound तिक्रक्रितव in which the
taddhita affixes added to the con-
stitutnt members of the com-
pound are dropped when the
dvandwa eompound is to be used
in the plural number; तेकायनयश्च कैत-
वायनयश्च तिक्रक्रितबा:: cf. Kas. on P. II.
4.68.
तिकन tad. affix तिक added to the
word मृद् in the sense of the word !
itself ( स्वंथे ) e. g. मृतिका cf.; P. V.
4.39.
तिकादिं a class of words headed by
the words तिक, केितव, संज्ञा and others
to which the taddhita affix अायनि
(फि्) causing the substitution of
wrddhi is added in the sense of
' a descendant ': e.g. तैकायनि:, कैत-
वायनि:; cf. Kas. on P. IV.1.154.
तिङ्ग (l) a brief term (प्रत्याहृार) for the 18
personal endings. Out of these
eighteen personal endings, which
are common for all tenses and
moods, the first nine तिप् , तस् etc.
all called Parasmaipada, while
the other nine त, अाताम् etc. are
named Atmanepada and तङ्क also;
cf. तञ्जनावात्मनेपदम्: (2) a verbal form
called also अाख्यातक्र: cf. तिङ्क खळ
अाख्यातुकां भवान्त , प्रचति पठति V.Pr.I.27.
तेड्न्त (l) a word ending in तिङ्क a
Verb; (2) a popular name given
to the section which deals with
verbs in books oa grammar as
contrasted with the term सुबन्त
which is used for the section deal-
ing with nouns.
तिडन्तइिारोमाणे a work dealing with
verbal forms written by शिरोमणि-
भट्टाचार्य.
तिडर्थ senses possessed by the person-
al endingsof verbs, viz. कारकं ( कतौ
or कमे ) संख्या and काळ. For details
see Vaiyakaranabhisanasra..

तिड्नघात
तिङ्कनघात the gravg accent for the
whole word( सर्वेनिघात् ) generally
possessed by a verbal form when it
is preceded by a word form which
, is hot a verb: cf. तिडतिड: P. VIII.
1.28.
तित् an affix to which the mute
indicatory letter त् is added signi-
fying the circumflex accent of
thataffix; e. g. the afixes यत्, ण्यत्
etc.; cf. P. VI. 1.185. _
तित्स्वर the circumflex accent possess-
ed by an affix marked with the
mute letter त्. See तित्.
तिधुक् the augment तिथ् added to the
words बहु, पूप, गण and संघ when
they are followed by the tad.
affix अ ( ड ) e, g. बहुतिथ:; cf. P.
V. 2.52.
तिप् the personal ending of the 3rd
pers. sing. substituted for ल (लकार)
in the Parasmaipada, For sub-
stitutes for तिप् in special cases, see
P. VI. 1 68, III. 4.82, 83, 84.
तिमण्ण a southern grammarian who
wrote a short treatise on the
pratyaharas like अणु , इण् etc. in
the grammar of Panini.
तिरुमल्ल a southern writer of the
commentary named सुमनेरमा on
the Siddhānta Kaumud of Bhat-
toj Diksita. _
तिळ tad. affix ति added in vedia
Literature to the word वृक when
superior quality is meant, e. g.
वृकति: cf, P. V. 4.41.
तिष्ठदुप्रभृति compound words head..
by the word तिष्ठहु which are
termed as avyayibhava con-
pounds and treated as indeclin.
ables; e. g. तिष्ठदु, असंप्रति
"ःgः, ग्राहम्
तीक्ष्ण utterance with a sharp tone
characterizing the pronunciation
of the Abhinihita kind of circum-
_
175
तुक्
Hex vowel as opposed to the
utterance which is called मृदु when
the circumflex, called पादवृत्त, is
pronounced cf सर्वेतीक्ष्णोषुभिनिढित:
श्छिद्रस्तदनन्तरम् , ततो मृदुतरौ स्वारौ जात्यतै-
प्राबुभौ स्मृतौ | तंते मृदुतंर: स्वारस्तैरोव्यञ्जन
उच्येते | पादवृत्ते मृदुतमस्त्वेतत्स्वारबलाबलम्
Uvva!a on V. Pr. I. 125.
तीय tad. affix ताय in the sense of "
पूरण added to the words द्वि and त्रि
before which त्रि is changed into
तृ. e, g. द्वितीयः, तृतीय: cf. P. V.
2.54, 55; the tad. affix अन् ( अ ) is
added to the words ending in तीय
to mean a section e. g. द्वितीये भागः
cf. Ks. on P. V. 3.48.
तीव्रतर extreme sharpness of the
nasalization at the time of pro-
nouncing the anusvara and the
fifth letters recommended by Sai-
tyyana. e. g. अमी-्रप्सुषदः, वञ्चत
परिवञ्चतं. cf T, Pr, xWII. 1. _
तु (1) short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the
dental consonants त्, थ्, द्, ध् and
न् cf P. I. 1.69; (2) personal-end-
ing substituted for ति in the 2nd
pers. imper. sing. Parasmaipada
cf. P. III, 4.86; (3) tad. affix तु
in the sense of possession added
in Vedic Literature to क्रम् and
शाम् e. g. क्रन्तुः, इन्तु: cf P. V. 2.138;
(4) undi affix तु ( तुन्) prescribed
by the rule सितनिगमिमसिसच्यविधाञ्कुशि-
भ्यस्तुन् ( Undi Sitra I.69 ), before
which the augment इ is not added
e. g. सतु: सक्तु: etc. cf. P. VII.
लुऋ augment त् added (1) to the root
वि in the form iचत्य, the pot. pass.
part. of चि cf. P. III. 1.132: (2) to
the short vowel at the end of a
root before a krt affix marked
with the mute letter पृ e.g. अञ्जिाचत्,
प्रहृत्य cf. P. VI. 1.7I ; (3) to a short
vowel before ， if there be close
proximity ( संहृिता ) between the

तुग्विधि
two e. g. इच्छति, रुच्छति: cf. P. VI.
1.73; (4) to the indeclinables अा
and मा as also to a long vowel
before छ, e. g. अच्छादयति, विचाच्छाद्यतः
cf P. WI. 1.74, 75; (6) to a long !
vowel optionally, if it is at the
end of a word, e. g. लक्ष्मीच्छाया ,
लक्ष्मीछाया, cf. P. VI. 1.76; (7) to the
letter न् at the end of a word
before , e.g. भवाञ्छेते, cf. P. VIII.
3.31.
तुग्विधि a rule prescribing the addi- }
tion of the augment त् ; e. g. नलेप:
सुप्स्वरसंज्ञातुग्विधिषु कृति P. VIII. 2. 2 ;
See ढक्.
roots such as the root तुज् and
the like, which have their vowel
of the reduplicative syllable leng-
thened as seen mostly in Vedic
Literature: e. g. तूतुजानः, मामइान:,
दाधार etc.: cf. K. on P. VI.1.7.
उद augment त् (1) added to the affix
अन substituted for the यु of ट् and
टद्यु : e. g. चिरंतनः, सायंतनः, cf. P.
V.3.23;(2) added to the tad.
afix इक (छक्) applied to the word
श्र， in the Saiikasenses e.g, इौव-
स्तिक: cf. P. IV. 3 15.
ठदादि a class ofroots headed by the
root बुद् which take the conjuga-
tional sign अ ( रा ) and which are
popularly called roots of the sixth
conjugation, cf. P. III.1.77.
उन्न Junadi affix तु, added to the roots
सि, तन् , गम् etc. See तु (4).
तुन्दादि a very small class .of words
headed by the word तुन्द to which
the taddhita affix इल ( इलच् ) is
added in the sense of possession
( मरूवर्थे ). The affix इल is optional
and the other affixes इन् , इक and
मू are also added: e.g. तुन्दिल', तुन्दी,
～ बुन्दिक:, तुन्द्रवान् ; similarly उदरिलः
* etc.; cf Kas. on P,V.2.117.
ढम् kt affix तुम् of the infinitive (1)
added to aroot optionally with
176
|
|
दृच्
एडट् when the root refers to an
action for the purpose of which
another action is mentioned by the
principal verb ; e.g. भोक्तुं व्रजतिं or
भोजं व्रजति: cf Ks on FIII.3.11:
(2) added fo a root connected with '
another root in the sense of desire
provided both have the same sub-
ject: e.g.. इच्छति भोक्तुम् ; cf. P. III.
3.198; (3) added to a root connec-
ted with the words काल, समय orवळ:
9.gः काले भोक्तुम् etc. c.f P.III.3.167
G) added to any root which ?
connected with the roots कू, धृष्,
ज्ञा, चै, वद्, रभ्, लभ्, क्रम् , सहृ, अaidई
or its Synonym, as also"with
*
' 9r s शु/nonym , e.g. इक्नोति भोक्तुम्
भदूति भीमूचुम्बेळ भोक्तुम् , अहं भोतु
पर्यातः कूर्मःcf. Ks6 P, iीं'
65, 66.
उठय similar in articulation: savarna:
cf. R, T. 168.
तुल्याधिकरण hawing got the same sub.
straturu denoting ultimately the
Sane object: expressed in the same
9ase the same as samanadhikaraha
in the grammnr of Panini, Gः
Kat. II.5.5.
ट (l) substitute prescribed for tha
last vowel of the word अर्वन् so a
to make it declinable like words
Imarked with the mute letter ऋ:
(2) common term for the krt
afixes दृन् and तृच् prescribed in the
sense of the agent of a verbal
activity: the tad. affixes ईयसु, and
इठ are seen placed after words
ending in तृ in Vedic Literature
before which the aHix तृ is elided;
e. 8 करिष्ठः, दोहृयसी: cf Ks on P.
V. 3.59.
ऋच्य् tad.. affix तृ, taking the fem.
afix ई ( डीप् ), (1) added to
a root optionally with अक ( बुद्ध )
in the sense of the agent of a
verbal activity, the word so form-

तृजन्त
ed having the last vowel acute;
e. g. कतं कारक:: हृत ह्यारक्रः: cf. P. III
I.133; (2) prescribed in the sense
of *deserving one optionally along
with the pot. pass. part. affixes e-8
भवान् खलु केन्यायं बोढा, भवान् कन्यां वहेत्,
भवता खलु कन्या वोढव्या, वाह्या, बहुनीयां व;
cf Kव्र8. on P. IHI. 3.169.
दृजन्त a word cnding in the affix तृच्
and hence getting the guja vowel
(i. e. अ ) substituted for the final
vowel ऋ before the Sarvana-
masthana (i. e. the first five) case
affixes: cf. तृजन्त आद्यः भविष्यति, M.
Bh. on VII. 1.96.
दृज्वद्भाव treatment of a word as
ending with the affix तृच् although,
in fact, it does not so end; e. g.
the word क्रोष्टु : cf. तृज्वत्क्रोष्टु:, P. VII.
1.95 ; cf. also तृज्वद्भावस्यावक्रान्तिाः क्री
क्रोधुना; M.Bh, on VII. 1.95 Vart.
10.
ऋणादि a class of words to which the
taddhita affix इा is added in the
four senses given in P. IV. 2.67 to
70: e. g. तृणज्ञः, नड्:, पर्णदा: etc.: cf.
Ka8. on P. IV. 3.80.
ढतीय the third consonants out of
the class consonants; वर्गतृतीय: vi2.
ग्, ज्, इ, दृ and इ: cf. यथा तृतीयास्तथा
पञ्चमा अानुनासि म् M. Bh. on P. I.
1.9.
|ृतीया the third case: affixes of the
third case ( instrumental case or
तृतीयाविभक्ति ) which are placed (1)
after nouns in the sense of an ins-
trument or an agent provided the
agent is not expressed by the
personal-ending of the root: e. g.
दवदचेतन क्तम् , परशुना छिनात: cf. P. III.
3.18; (2) after nouns connected
with सई, nouns meaning defective
limbs, nouns forming the object of
, हा with सृम् as also nouns meaning
दृढ or a thing capable of produc
ing a result: e. g. पुत्रेण सहृागतं:, अक्ष्णा
23
177
तृन्
काण:, मात्रा संजानीते, विद्यया यशः; cf K5.
on P. II.3.19,23; (3) optionally
with the ablative after nouns
meaning guality, and optionally
with the genitive after pronouns
in the sense of हेतु, when the word
तु is actually ised 6. g. पाण्डित्येन
मुक्तः or. पाण्डित्यान्मुक्त:: केन हेतुना or
कंस्य हृतीर्वसत, it is observed by the
Varttikakra that when the word
हृतु or its synonym is used in a sen-
tence, a pronoun is put in any
case in apposition to that word
i.e. हेतु of its synonym e.g, केन
निभितेन, किं निमित्तम् etc.; cf Kas. on
P. II. 3. 25, 27 ; (4) optionally
after nouns connected with the
words पृथक्, विना, नाना,after the words
स्तोक्र, अल्प, ' as also after दूर, अन्तिक
and their synonyms; e.g- पृथग्देवृद्तन
etc. स्तेकेन मुक्तः, दूरेण ग्रामस्य, केदैः प्रसित:;
cf. Ks.on P.II.3. 32, 33,35, 44; (5)
optionally with the locative case
after nouns meaning constellation
when the tad. affix after them has
een elided: e.g. पुष्येण संप्रयातोस्मि श्रवणे
पुनरागतः Mahabharata: cf. P.II.3.45;
(6) optionally with the genitive
case after words connected with
तुल्य or its synonyms;e.gतुल्येो देवदतन,
तुल्ये देवदत्तस्य: cf. P. II.3.72.
तृतीयासमास called also तृतीयातत्पुरुषसमास
as prescribed by P. II. I. 30-35;
e.g. तृतीयासमास P.I. 1-30 and the
Mahabhasya thereon.
तृन् (1) krt affix तृ with the acute
accent on the first vowel of the
word formed by its application,
applied to any root in the sense of
*an agent provided the agent is
habituated to do a thing, or has his
nature to do it, or does it well: e.g.
वदित जनापवादान् , मुण्डयितारः श्राविष्ठायना
-भवन्ति वधूसूढम् , कर्तौ कटम्; cf. Ks. on
P. III.2.135; words ending with
तृन् govern the noun connected
with them in the accusative case;

तैत्तिरीयप्रातिशाख्य
(2) the term तृन् , used as a short
term ( प्रत्याहृार ) standing for krt
afixes beginning with those prs-
cribed by the rule लट: इतृदानचौ?
(P.III.2.124) and ending with the
affix तृन् (in P.III.3.69); cf K. on
P.]II.4.69.
तैत्तिरीयप्रातिशाख्य called also कृष्णयजु:-
प्रातिसाख्य and hence representing
possibly all the different branches
or Sakhs of the कृष्णयजुर्वेद, which is
not attributed definitely to a parti-
cular author but is Supposed to
have been revised from time to
time and taught by various acryas
who were the followers of the
Taittiriya Sakha.The work is divid-
ed into two main parts, each of
which is further divided into twelve
sections called adhyyas, and
discusses the various topics such as
letters and their properties, accen-
ts, euphonic changes and the like,
just as the other Pritisakhya
works. It is believed that Wararuci,
MahiSeya and Atreya wrote Bh5-
yas on the Taittiriya Prtiईakhya,
but at present,only two important
commentary works on it are avai-
lable- (a) the *Tribhagyaratna',
based upon the three Bhsyas
mentioned above as the titleshows,
written by Somayarya and (b) the
' Vaidikibharana * written by
Gopalayajvan. For details see
Introduction to * Taittiriya
Pratisakhya ' ed. Govt Oriental
Library Series, Mysore.
तेरोविराम a kind of रूचरित, or a vowel
with a circumflex accent which
follows an acute-accented vowel
characterized by avagraha i. e.
coming at the end of the first
member of a compound; e. g गेाप-
ताविति गेSपतै यज्ञपतिमिति यज्ञSषतं.Here
the vowel अ of प्र following upon
178
त्तप्पू
K
the avagraha is called तैरोचेरामरूचरित:
, 9 उद्वग्रहुतेरोविराम: V. Pr. I. 118,
तैरोव्यञ्जन a kind of svarita or circum-
flex-accented vowel which follows
an acute-accented vowel, with the
intervention of a consonant
between the acute accented vowel
and the circumflex vowel which
(vowel) originally was grave. e, g.
इड, रन्त, हृयं, कामेयै; here the vowel
ए is तैरोव्यञ्जनस्वरित: cf. स्वरो व्यञ्जनयुतस्तैरी-
ब्यञ्जन:, V. Pr. I. 117.
तैलच् tad. afix तैल applied in the
sense of oil to a word meaning the
substance from which oil is extra-
cted: e. g. तिलतैलं सर्षपतैलम् : cf. विक्ररे
सेनहुने तैलच्, Ks on P. V. 2. 29.
तोलप्पदीक्षतं a southern grammarian
who has written a gloss called
प्रक्र्ा on the Siddhāntakaumud
of Bhattoj Diksita.
तोसुन् k affix तोसृ in the sense of
the infinitive ( तुम्) seen in Vedie
Literature; e. g. ईश्वरोभिचरितो:. The
word ending with तोसुन् becomes
an indeclinable.
S__rs
ताद्दक a root belonging to the तुदादि
class of roots ( sixth conjugation )
which take the vikarana अ ( बा )
causing no guna or vrddhi substi-
\ tute for the vowel of the root.
तौल्वल्यादि a class of words headed
by the word तौल्वाल, the taddhita
afix in the sense of युबन् ( grand-
child ) placed after which is not
elided by P, II. 4. 60; e.g. तौल्वलि:
पिता, तौल्वलायनः पुत्रः; cf Kas.on P.II.
4.61.
त्न tad. affix त्न added to the words
चर, परुत् and परारि showing time, as
also to the word प्रग in Wedic
Literature: e. g. चिरत्नम्, परुत्नम् ,
परारित्नम्, प्रत्नम् ( where ग is elided );
cf. K5, on P. IV. 3. 23.
त्नप् tad. affix त्न, added to the word
' नव optionally with the affixes तनपु

त्य 179
त्रिपद
and ख before which नव is changed
to नृ :e. g. नूत्नम् , नूतनम्, नवीनम् ; cf
P. V. 4, 30 Varf.6.
त्य ( 1) tad. affix लय standing for त्यक्
and त्यप् which see below; (2)
a technical term for प्रत्यय ( a
suffix or a termination ) in the
Jainendra Vyakaraja.
त्यक् tad. affix त्य added in the
Saisika senses to the words दक्षिणा,
प्रश्चात् and पुरस्: e. g. दाक्षिणात्यः,पाश्चात्यः,
मैरस्त्थ:, दाक्षिणायिका cf. P. IV 2. 98.
त्यकन tad. affix त्यक added to the
words उप and अघि in the senses
*near' and *above' respectively;
cf. पर्वतस्यासन्नमुपत्यका, तयैब्ररूढमधित्यक्रा,
cf. K8. on P. V. 2.34.
त्यदादि a term used for the class of
pronouns headed by त्यद् which
are eight viz. त्यद्,तद्, यद्, एतद्, अदसु,
इदम् , एक and द्वि: cf.P.I.1.74,I.2.72,
III. 2. 60, VII. 2. 102.
त्यदादिविधि a specific operation pres-
cribed for the pronouns headed
by त्यद् e. g the substitution of अ
for the final letter: cf. त्यदादिविधौ च
प्रयोजनम्, M. Bh. on P. I. 1. 27
Vart. 6.
त्यप् tad. affix त्य (1) added to a few
specified indeclinables in the Saigi-
ka senses: e. g. अमात्य:,इहृत्यः etc.: cf.
Kas. on IV. 2. 104; (2) added to
theindeclinablesएषमस्, ह्यस् and श्वसु
< optionally along with ट्यु and ठन् ;
eःg. श्वरूयम्,_श्वरूतनमु, शौवरिंतक्रम्: cf.
Kas, on P. IV. 2.105.
श्र a common term for the krt afixes
न and इत्र (P.III. 2. 181-186) in
case the vowel इ of इत्र is look-
ed upon as equivalent to an aug-
मnept as also for the updi affix यून्
and the tad. affixes त्र and त्रल् (P.
IV. 2.51 and V.3.10):the tad, afix
ऋ is added in the sense of समूहृ or
Collection to the word गेी,e.g.
गोत्रा: cf Ks on P.IV.2.51.
त्रळ tad. affix termed Vibhakti added
to pronouns excepting द्वि and
others, and to the words बहु andकैिम्
when they end with the loc case
termination: e.g. कुत्र, तत्र, बहुत्र etc-;
cf. K. on P.V. 1.10, 14.
ना tad. affix त्रा in the sense of some-
thing donated, as also to the
words देव, मनुष्य, पुरुष,पुरु and मत्यै end-
ing in the accusative or the loca-
tive case; e. g. व्राह्मणत्रा करोति, दवत्रा
बसति: cf. K. on P. V.4.55,56.
There is avagraha before the tad.
afix त्रा. दवत्रेति दवSत्रा:cf. V.Pr. V.9.
त्रि (1) krt affix त्रि, always having the
tad. affix मपू ( म ) added to it,
applied to the roots marked with
the mute syllable ड् prefixed to
them in the IDhtupatha: e. g.
कृत्रिमम् , पक्त्रिमम् ; (2) a term signify-
ing the plural number: cf.ना नौ
मे मेदर्थं त्रिद्वयकेषु V.Pr.II.3.
त्रिक lit. triad: a term used in the
Mahabhsya in connection with
the Vibhakti affixes i.e. case end-
ings and personal endings which
are in groups of three; cf. त्रिकं
पुनर्विभक्तिसंज्ञम् M.Bh. on P.I.1,38: cf.
also कस्यचिदव त्रेकस्य प्रथमसंज्ञा स्यात् M.
Bh. om P.I.4.101 ; cf. also M. Bh.
on II.2.23, V.1.52, V.1.58.
त्रिपथगा name of a commentary on
the Paribhasendusekhara written
by Raghavendracarya Gajendra-
gadkar, a resident of Satara and a
pupil of NilakanthaSastri Thatte.
He lived in the second half of the
eighteemth and first half of the
nineteenth century and wrote com-
entaries on important grammar
works.
त्रिपद् made up of a collection of three
padas or words; the word is used
in connection with a Rk or a por>
tion of the kramapatha: cf. यथेक्तं
पुनरुक्तं त्रिपदप्रभृति T.Pr.I.61. The word

त्रिपादी
180
त्र्य्ः
is found used in connection with a
bahuvrihi compound made up of
three words; cf the term त्रिपद-
त्रिपाद a term usually used in conne-
ction with the last three Padas (ch,
VIII. 2, VIII. 3 and VIII. 4) of
Paninis Adhyay, the rules in
which are not valid by convention
to rules in the first seven chapters
and a quarter, as also a later rule
in which (the Tripdi) is not valid
to an earlier one; cf. पूर्वत्रासिद्धम् P.
VIII.2.1; (2) name of a critical
treatise on Phini's grammar (*The
Tripadi*) written by Dr. H. E.
Buiskool recently.
त्रिभाष्यरत्न name of a commentary on
the Taittirjya Pratisakhya written
by Somayarya. The commentary
is said to have been based on the
three Bhagya works attributed to
the three ancient Wedic scholars-
Vararuci, Mhiseya and Atreya.
त्रिमात्र consisting of three moras or
' matras. The protracted or प्रित
vowels are said to consist of three
matras as contrasted with the
short and long vowels which
respectively consist of one and two
matras cf. Ka8, on P.I.2.27.
_< _K
fत्रेमुन (1) the famous three ancient
grammarians Panini (the author of
the Sutras), Katyyana (the author
of the Varttikas), and Patajali
(the author of the Mahabhagya:)
(2) fhe grammar of Panini, called
so, being the contribution of the
reputed triad of Grammarians.
त्रिरुक्त repeated thrice, occurring
' thrice; a term used in the Prati-
Sakhya works in respect of a word
which is repeated in the krama
and other artificial recitations.
त्रिलोकनाथ son of Vaidyanatha who
, wrote a small treatise on karakas | "
called घट्कारक्रनिरूपण.
त्रिळींबन a scholar ofgrammar who
has written a small work named
अव्ययशब्दवृति on the uses of indeclin-
ables.
त्रिविक्रम pupil of Vardhamana who
wrote a gloss called * पञ्जिक्रीद्वयीत '.
on the Katantra-vrtti
त्रिशिखा name of a commentary on
the Paribhsendusekhara written
by Laksminrsirhha in the 18th
century.
त्रैकाल्य all the three times past, pre-
sent and future cf. त्रयः काला:
समाहृताः त्रिकालम्, त्रिकालमेव त्रैकाल्यम् !
स्वार्थे ष्यञ्ज Uvvatabhasya on V. Pr.
[. [5.
त्रेपादिक a rule or an operation pres-
cribed by Panini in the last three
guarters of his Asidhyay. See
त्रिपादीं above.
चैइाब्द्य a collection of three words
(to express the same sense); cf.
अपि च त्रैशब्द्यं न प्रकल्पत | अस्पृक्षत् अस्पाक्षत्
अस्प्राक्षीदिति M. Bh. on III. 1.44;
cf. also M. Bh. on P. I. 4,74, IV.
1. 88, IV. 2.60 etc.
त्रेस्वये (l) use of the three accents
acute, grave and circumflex at the
time of the recital of the Weda;
त्रयः स्वरा एव त्रैस्वर्यम्: cf. चातुर्वण्र्यादीनां
स्वार्थं उपसंख्यानम् | त्रैलेक्यम् , त्रैस्र्यर्यम् K,
on P. V. 1. 124. cf. also यद्यवै त्रैस्वर्य
न प्रकल्पते तत्र को दोषः , त्रैस्वर्येणाधीमहृ इत्य-
तनोपपद्यते | M. Bh. on P. I. 2.31.
त्र्यक्षर (a word) having three vowels
or syllables in it; त्र्यच् or त्र्यच्क: cf.
ह्यक्षरत्र्यक्षरेभ्य इति वक्तव्यम् cf. M. Bh.
on WIII 4.6.
त्र्यम्बक a grammarian of the nine-
teemth century, who resided at
Wal in Satra District and wrote
a commentary on the Paribhsen-
dusekhara which is named त्रयम्बकी
after the writer.

त्र्यम्बकी 181
थ!
न्यस्वकी a commentary on the Pari-
, bhagendusekhae by स्वव्यक: see
त्र्यम्बक.
त्व tad. affix त्व in the sense of duty,
nature or essence, prescribed
optionally with the affix त ( त );
e. g. अश्वत्वम्, गेीत्वम् , अश्ता, गेता; cf
तस्य भावस्त्वतलै P. V. 1.1 19, also cf
त्वतलेगुणवचनस्य P. VH. 3. 35 Vart.lo.
त्वत् krt affix त्च in the sense of the
potential pass. part. in Wedic
Literature:e. g. क्रत्र्वं हृविः ' कर्तव्यम्:
also cf. Kas, on P.III. 4.14;cf also
कृतानि या च कत्र्वा R. V. 1X. 47.2.
हवन tad. affix त्व before which there
is observed the caesura or ava-
graha in the recital of the Pada-
pgha. e: g. दवत्वमिति देवsत्त्रम् [ cf.
V. Pr. V. 9.
थ
थ् () second consonant of the dental
class of consonants possessed of
the properties श्वासानुप्रदान, अघोष, विवृत-
कण्ठत्व and मह्यप्राणत्व: (2) augment
श्य् ( धुक् ) added to the words षष्ट् ,
' कति, कतिपय and न्वतुर् before the
Prana affix डट्. e. g. षण्णां पूरण: षष्ठ:,
कतिथः, न्वतुर्थः; cf. Kas, on P. V.
2.51 ; (3) substitute for the con-
" sonant ， of आहृ before any con-
" sonant exccpt a nasal, and a
semivowel as also for the cons0-
nant स् of स्था preceded by the
' preposition उद्: cf. P, VIII. 2.35,
VIfII. 4.61.
थ (l) personal-ending of the 2nd
: pers. pl. Parasmaipada,substituted
< for the º of the ten lakra affixes;
(2) substitute ( थल् ) for the 2nd
pers sing. personal ending सिप् in.
the perfect tense: (3) umadi affix
( थक् ) added to the roots पा, तू बुद्
etc. e. g. पीथः, तीर्थः, etc.; cf uhadi
. Stra II. 7; (4) unadi affix ( क्थन् ) |
added to the roots √ कुर्मः ， न ct::
e. g, हृथः, कुष्, नीथ: etc. cf undi
g fa II. 2: (5) undi affix (थन्)
added to the roots उधू, कुष्, गI and
ऋ, e. g. ओष्ठ:, कोष्ठम् etc. cf ujadi
sutra_II. 4; (6) a technical term
for the term अभ्यस्त or the redu-
plicated wording of Panini ( cf.
उभे अभ्यस्तम् ) P. VI. 1. 5, used in
the Jainendra Vyakarana.
थक् krt affix थक्र added to the root
गे * t6 sing, in the sense of agent
provided he is skilled: e. g. गाथक्रः ;
cf. P. III. 1.146.
थद् tad. affix थ added to numerals
ending in न् in Vedic Literature;
e. g. पञ्चथ, सप्तथः, पर्णमयानि पञ्चथानि
भवन्ति: cf. P. V. 2.50.
थन personal-ending थन substituted
for त of the 2nd pers. pl. of the
imperative Parasmaipada in Vedic '
Literature, e. g. यदिष्ठन for यदिच्छथ:
cf. Kas. on P. VII. 1.45.
थमु tad. affix थम् in the sense of
प्रकार (manner) added to the pro-
nouns इदम्, and किम्, the words
ending in थम् becoming indeclina-
bles; e. g, इत्थम्, कथम् cf. P. V.
3.24, 25. _ -
थ¶ personal ending थ substituted
for सिप् of the 2nd pers.sing. Paras-
maipada in the perfect tense as
also in the present tense in speci-
fic cases; cf. P. III. 4.82, 88,84.
थस् personal ending of the 2nd
pers. dual Parasmaipada, which
issubstituted for ळ of the lakra
affixes; cf. P. III 4.78.
थI (1) tad. affix था in the sense of
guestion or reason ( हृतु ) added to
the pronoun क्रम् in Vedic ILitera-
ture; e.g. कथा देवा आसन् ; cf. Kag.
on P.V.3.26; (2) tad. affix था (थाळ
according to Panini) which gets
caesura or avagraha after मत्न, पूर्व,
वि, इम and ऋतु: e.gः प्रत्नथेतिं प्रत्नथां,

थाल्
पूर्वथेति पूर्वsथा etc.: cf. Vij. Pr.V.12:
(3) tad. affix थाट् in thc sense of
इव added to the words प्रत्न, पूर्व, विश्व
and इम in Wcdic Literature, e.g.
तं प्रत्नथा पूर्वथा विश्वथेमथा: cf Ka, on P.
V.3.11 1: (4) tad. affix थाल् in the
sense of mannar ( प्रक्रार) added to
क्रिन् , pronouns excepting those
headed by द्वि, and the word बहु:
e.g. सर्वथा, cf. P V.3.23.
थाल् tad. affix थाळ. See था.
थास् personal ending of the 2nd
pers. sing. Atmanepada, substitut-
ed for लु of the lakara affixes.
थीम (THIEME, PAUL) a sound
scholar of the present day, well
wersed in Sanskrit Grammar and
Vedic Literature, who has written
a critical treatise named *Panini
and the Weda."
थ्क् (1) augment थ् added to the
words षष्, कति, कतिपय and चतुर्: see
थ् above; (2) augment थ् added to
the root अस्र ofthe fourth conjugati-
on Paras. before the affixes of the
aorist. e.g. अास्थत्: cf P.VII.4.17.
थ्यन tad. affix थ्य in the sense of
*favourable for' ( तस्मै हृितम् ) added
to the words अज and ओवि: e.g.
-अजध्या यूथः। आवेथ्या ) cf Kas. on P.
W.1.8.
द
द् third consonant of the dental class
ofconsonants possessed of the pro-
perties नादानुप्रदान, घीष, संवृतकण्ठत्व and
अल्पप्राणता:(2) consonantद्substituted
for the final letter of nouns ending
with the affix वस् as also for the final
letter of ¶स्, ध्वंस् and अनडुद् provided
the final letter is at the end of
a pada; e.g. विद्वद्भ्याम् etc.; cf Kव्र5.
on P, VIII. 2.72; (3) consonant द्
182
substituted for the final स् of roots
excepting the root.अक्, before the
द्न्तेीष्ठय
personal ending तिपू of the third
pers. sing.: e. g. अचकाद् भवान् ; cf.
P. WIII. 3.93.
द् (1) the consonant द्, the vowel अ
being added for facility of utter-
ance or use; (2) a technical term
used in the Jainendra Vyakarama
for the term आत्मनेपद in the gram-
mar of Panini.
दग्घ a fault of pronunciation where
the letters are uttered indistinct
( अस्पष्ट ).
दञ्जच्इ tad. affix दन prescribed optiona-
lly with द्वयस and मात्र in the sense
of measure ( प्रमाण ), with डीप् ( ई )
to be added further to form the
fem. base, e. g. जानुदघ्नम्, जानुद्वयसम्,
जानुमात्रम् , जानुदघ्नी, cf. P. V. 2.37 and
IV.1.15; दनच् is added optionally
along with अण् as also with द्वयस
and मात्र to the words पुरुष and हृस्तिन्
e.g. पुरुषद्वयसम्, पौरुषम् पुरुषदेन्, पुरुषमात्रम्;
cf. P. V. 2.38.
दण्ड one of the eight artificial Vedic
recitations.
दण्डादि a class of words headed by
the word दण्ड to which the taddhita
affix य, is added in the sense of
*deserving', cf. दण्डमर्हति दण्डश्यः Kas.
on P. V. 1.66
दधिपयआदि a class of compound
words headed by the word दधिपयस्
which are not compounded as
समाहृारद्वन्द्व which ends in the neuter
gender and singular number; e.g.
दधिपयसी, दिाववैश्रवणौ, श्रद्धातपसी etc.; cf.
Kas. on P.II. 4.14.
दन्त place where the utterance of
dental letters originates;cf. लतुलसानां
दन्त्: S. K. on P. I. 1.9.
दन्तमूलीय the letters त्, थ् द् ध् and न्:
cf. दन्तमूलीयस्तु तक्रारवर्गः R. Pr. I. 19.
The Rk. Pratisakhya calls र् (रेफ )
also as दन्तमूलीय.
दन्तोष्ठय also दन्त्योष्ठय or : दन्त्यैौष्ठथ the

दन्त्य
183
द्वानीम्
dentolabial letter इ: cf. ओीष्णान्ताभ्यां
दन्तैर्वेकर · दन्तैरिते स्थानेनिर्द: | ओष्ठान्ता-
भ्याम् इति करणनिर्दद्या: Com. on T-Pr.II.
43.
द्न्त्य produced at the teeth, dental;
formed at the teeth by the tip of
the tongue; e.g- the letters ल , ्
and तवर्ग: cf. ल्छलसिता दनेत V.Pr.I.69.
According to Panini's grammar |
लट् (long) does not exist. Accord-
ing to Taittirya Prtisakhya र्
is partly dental and partly lingual;
cf T.Pr.II.41, while व् is partly
dental and partly labial; cf. T.Pr.
II.43; cf. दन्त्या जिह्वाग्रकरणा: V. Pr.I. ]
76: cf. डग्वा दु नेपदे दन्त्ये |
P. VII. 3.73.
द्यानन्द्सरस्वती a brilliant Vedic
scholar of the ninetcenth century
belonging to North India who
established on a sound footing the
study of the Vedas andVyakarana
and encouraged the study of
Kasikavrtti. He has written many
books on Wedic studies.
दयापाल a.]ain writer who wrote a
treatise named रूपसिाद्व.
दयारत्न a.Jain scholar who has written
a grammar treatise on the Saras-
vata Grammar called सारस्वतपरिभाषा.
दयाराम writer of a commentary on
the Mugdhabodha Vyakarana
of Bopadeva.
ण name of a commentary on
Kondabhatta's Vaiyakaranabhuisa-
asara, written by a grammarian
named Harivallabha.
द्र्षणा name of a commentary on the
Sabdakaustubha, written by
Mannudeva or Mantudeva of the
nineteenth century.
ब्राक a name given to the treatise on
grammar written by 1्याघ्रपाद which
consisted of 10 chapters; cf. दढाकं ;
वैयाघ्रपदीयम् Kas. on P V. 1.58. The
word also means students reading
the work दशाक; cf. द्राक्रा वैयाघ्रपदीया:
Kव8. on P. IV.2.65.
द्इागणी (1) a section of grammatical
treatises dealing with the ten
comjugations of roots. e.g the
first section of the second pant
( उत्तरार्ध ) of the Siddhanta Kau-
mud; (2) name of the dhatupatha
of Panini which gives ten classes
of roots; cf. भूवादये ददागणीपरिपठिता
गृह्यन्त Nyasa on I.3.1.
द्शाधुष्करण the ten classes or conjuga-
tions of roots; धुष् was a term for
धातु (root) in some ancient gram-
mar works.
दशाबलकारिका a short treatise on the
roots belonging to more than one
conjugation; the name of the
author is not given.
द्ा tad. affix named *vibhakti app-
lied to the words सर्व, एक, अन्य, किं,
यत्,तत् and इदम् in the locative case;
e.g. सर्वदा, एकदा, कदा: cf. Kas. on
P. V. 3.15,19,20,21.
दाक्षायण name, by which ब्याडि, the
author of the grammar work संप्रहृ
is referred to. The word दाक्षायण
indicates that ब्याडि was a
descendant ofदक्ष, and, as Panini
is called दाक्षीपुत्र, critics say
that Panini and Vyadi were
relatives; cf. शेोभना खलु दाक्षायणस्य
दाक्षायणेन वा संग्रहृस्य कृति: M. Bh. on P.
II.3.66.
दाक्षीपुत्र lit. son of a female descen-
dant of दक्ष: name given to Panini
who was the son of दाक्षी a female
descendant of दक्ष: cf.,शंकर: इांकरी
प्रादाद्दाक्षीपुत्राय धीमते Pan. Sik. 56: cf.
also सर्वे सर्वपदादेशा दाक्षीपुत्रस्य पाणिनः
M.Bh. on P. I. 1.20: VII.1.27.
दानाविजय a Jain grammarian, who
wrote a small grammar treatise
named इाब्दभूषण. _
दानम tad. affix called विभक्ति, applied

दामन्यादि
184
दुःश्लिष्ट
to तद् and इदम् in the sense of the
locative case e.g. तदानीम् इदानीम्;
cf. P. V.3.18, 19.
दामन्यादि a class of words headed by
the word दामनि to which the tadd-
hita affix छ is added without any
change ofsense: e.g.दामनीय, औौलपीयः
cf. Kas. on P. V, 3.116.
दारुण्य explained by the commentators
on the Pratisचkhya works as दृढल्च
(firmness) or कठिनता (hardness,) and
given asa characteristic of the acute
or उदात्त tone: cf. अायामे दारुण्यमणुता
खसेयत्युचैःकराणि शब्दस्य, T. Pr. XXII.9,
guoted in the Mahabhasya on P.[.
2.29, where दारुण्य is explained as
स्वरस्य दारुणता रूक्षता !
दासीभारादि a class of words headed
by the word दासीभार which,although
they are tatpurusa compounds,
retain the accents of the first
member of the compound: cf. P.
WI.2.42.
द्वि a technicaf term in the Jainen-
dra Vyakaraha for the term प्रगृह्य
used by Panini.
दिक्इाब्द् a word denoting a direction
such as पूर्वे, उत्तर and the like, used
as a substantive, e. g. पूर्वे ग्रामात् , or
showing the direction of another
thing being its adjective, e. g.
इयमस्याः पूर्वा;cf Kas, 6n P. II.3.29.
दृिक्समास the bahuvrihi compound
prescribed by the rule दिङ्नामान्यन्तरोळ,
e.g. पूर्वोत्तरा (north-east) or उत्तरपश्चिमा
(north-west): cf. दिक्समास: दिगुपदिष्ट:
समास:, K8. on P.I. 1.28.
दिगादि a class of words headed by
the word दिक् to which the tad.affix
य ( यत् ) is added in the sense of
*produced therein ( तत्र भवः ), e.g.
ादेशो भवं दिव्यम्, similarly वग्र्यमु, गण्यः
etc.; cf. Kas. on P.IV.3.54.
देिनण् tad. affix added to the word
, मध्य, before which. मध्य् is changed
to मध्यम्: e. g. माध्यान्दिन उद्वायति;cf मध्य
मध्यं दिनण् चास्मात् M.Bh. on IV. 3.60.
द्विचादि a class of roots of the fourth
conjugation, headed by the root
दिव् ( दीव्यति ), called also दूब्यत्यादि
cf. P. I. 2.27.
दो a technical term in the Jainendra
Vyakarana for दार्ध (long vowel)
in Panini's grammar.
दीपप्रभा a commentary on बाररुचसंग्रहृ
by नारायण.
दीप्ति explained as रुपूर्ति or throbbing
in utterance. Out of the seven
svaras or yamas कुष्ट, प्रथम, द्वितीय,
तृतीय, चतुर्थ, मन्द्र and आर्तस्वायं, the
throbbing ( दीति ) of the latter
and latter tone leads to the per-
ception of the formerand former
one: cf. तेषां दीतिजेोपलब्धि: T. Pr.
XXIII. 15.
दीधे long: a term used in connec-
tion with the lengthened tone of
a vowel described to be dvimatra
as contrasted with हृख having one
mitra and प्डत hawing three ma-
tras; cf. द्विस्तावान् द्र्ध: V. Pr. I. 35,
V. Pr. I. 57, also ऊकालोज्झ्रस्वदीर्घप्लुत:
P, I.2.27.
c_K -
दीर्घविधि a grammatical operation
where a short vowel is turned
into a long one: a rule of gram-
mar prescribing the lengthening
of a short vowel.
डु a technical term in the Jainendra
Vyakarana for the term वृद्ध which
is used in Panini's grammar and
which is defined by Panini in the
rule वृद्धिर्यस्याचामादिस्तद् वृद्धम् P. I. 1.73.
दुःश्लिष्ट a word, or words whose case
affixes can be syntactically con-
nected only with some difficulty;
cf.बहुव्रीहौ सक्थ्यक्ष्णोः स्वाङ्गात् षच् ) स्वाङ्गवाची
यः सक्थिशब्दः अाक्ष्ाब्दश्च तदन्तोद् बहुव्रीहेः
षच् भवति | सूत्रे तु दुःश्लिष्टविभक्तीनि पदानि
KS, on P. V. 4.I 13. .

दुःस्पृष्ट
185
दूषण
दुःस्पृष्ट produced by an incomplete
contact of the करण : the term is
applied to the phonetic element
← which is due to the incomplete
contact of the organ at the pro-
duction of the letter : cf दु:रघट-
श्रति विज्ञयः: Pan, Siks 5.
दुर्गसिंह the famous commentator of
the Katantra sutras, whose Vtti
on the sutras is the most popular
one. It is called , कातन्त्रसूत्रवृत्त or
कातन्तवृत्ति or दौर्गसिंहृीवृति , also. A
work on Paribhags named परिभाषा-
वृति, in which Paribhss are ex-
plained and established as based
on the Katantra Vyakaratha
stras, is attributed to Durga-
sirhha. It is doubtful whether
this commentator Durgasimha is
the same as Durgicarya, the
famous commentator of Yaska's
Nirukta. There is a legend that
Durgasirhha was the brother of
Vikramaditya, the founder of the
Vikrama Era. Besides the gloss
on the Katantra stºtras, some gra-
mmar works such as a gloss on
the updi stras, a gloss ( वृत्ति ) on
Kalpa-Vyakarana Stitras, a com-
mentary on Karakas named षट्का-
रक्ररत्न, Namalinganussana and
Paribhasavrtti are ascribed to
Durgasirhha. Some scholars be-
lieve that the term अमरसिंहृ was
only a title given to Durgasirhha
for his profound scholarship, and
it was Durgasimha who was the
author of the well-known work
Amarakosa.
दुगीदास a grammarian who wrote
(a) a gloss on Bopadevas Mug-
ghabodha, (b) a gloss named घातु-
दीपिकृ on Kavikalpadruma and
(c) Sabdarnavakosa.
दुगेत्तम a grammarian who wrote
a work on genders called लिङ्गानु-
दारुन and also a commentary on it.
24
| दुर्घटवृति name of a grammar woºk
explaining words which are difficult
to derive according to rules of
Panini. The work is written in
the style of a running commen*
tary on select stras of Paini,
devoted mainly to explain difficult
formations. The author of it,
Saranadeva, was an eastern gra-
mmarian who, as is evident from
the number of guotations in his
work, was a great scholar of the
12th or the 13th century.
दुर्घटवृत्तिसंस्करण a grammar work
the formation of difficult
Oia
words attributed to इवैराक्षत or
सर्वराक्षत.
दुर्धटद्धार name.of a commentary by
Kesavadatta-Sarman on the gra-
mmar work named सेक्षितसार.
G
दुर्वलाचार्य a grammarian who wrote
a treatise on grammar दुर्वलीयव्याकरण,
named after him. Besides this
treatise, he has written commen-
taries on NageSa's Laghumafijप्isa
and ParibhagenduSckhara.
दुस्स्पृष्ट see दु:स्पृष्ट.
_K_K
mame of a commentary,
on the Paribhasendusekhara of
Nagesa, believed to have been
written by Gopalacārya Karhadkar,
a grammarian of the 19th century
and attributed to Bhimacarya.
This commentary, which was
written to criticize the comment-
ary written by Visnusstrº Bhat,
was again criticized in reply by
Visnusastr Bhat in his Ciccamdrika
. ( चिचन्द्रिका ). See विष्णुशास्त्री भट.
दूषण fault, objection; the word
is used in connection with a fault
found with, or objection raised
against an argument advanced by,
a writer by his opponent or by
the writer himself who replies it to
make his argument well establis-

देवानन्द्न्ि
' hed: cf.नित्यवादी कार्यपक्षे दूषणमाहृ-कार्यविति
, Mahव्र, Prad. on P.I. 1.44 Wart.!6.
दूस tad. affix prescribed after the
word अवि in the sense of milk(दुग्ध)
along with the affixes सेढ and मरीस
optionally, by the Varttikakara;
e. g. अविदूसम् | अविसेीढम् | अविमरीसम्:
cf. Ka:, on M. Bh. IV. 2. 36.
दृढादि a class of words headed by दृढ
word ending in the dual number,
and (b) that both the words retain
their original accents.e.g. इन्द्रासोमैौ,
सेीमापूष्णा, अग्नीषोमाभ्यां, मित्रावरुणाभ्याम् : fof
changes, cf. P, VI.3.25-31; for
accent, cf. देवताद्वन्द्वानि चानामन्त्रितानि
(द्विरुदात्तानिं) " इन्द्राबृहुरपतिभ्याम्, इन्द्राबृहस्पती
इति त्रीणि V. Pr. I.48, 49: cf. also
देवताद्वन्द्वे च P. VI, 2.141.
to which the tad. affix य ( ष्यञ् ) देवनन्द्रिन् called also पूज्यपाद or पूयपाद-
or इमन् ( इमनिच् ) is added in the
sense of na:ure ( भाव ); त्व and त
( ता ) can, of course, be added
optionally e.g. दाढर्यम्, द्रढिमा दृढत्वम्,
दृढता.See also लवण्य दैत्य, औष्ण्य, जाडय,
पाण्डित्य, मौ:यै etc.; cf Kas. on
P. V. 1. 123.
दृष्ट seen in use in Wedic Literature,
or Classical Literature, or in the
talk of cultured people; said in
connection with words which a
grammarian tries to explain; cf.
दृष्टानुविधिश्छन्दसि भवति' Vyadi Pari.
Pagha 68.
दृष्टानुबोध taking place of an opera-
देवनन्दन् believed to have lived in
the fifth century A. D. and written
the treatise on grammar, of course
based om Panini Sitras, which is
known as जेनेन्द्र-्याकरण or जैनेन्द्र-
इाब्दानुशासन. The writer of this gram-
mar is possibly mentioned as जैनेन्द्र
in the usually guoted verse of
Bopadeva :- इन्द्रश्चन्द्रः काढाकृत्स्नापइाळी
ढाकंटायनः पाणिन्यमरजेनेन्द्र जयन्त्यष्टादेिशा-
ब्दिका:देवनन्दिन् was a greatJain saint
and scholar who wrote many
works on Jain Agamas of which
सर्वार्थसिद्धि, the commentary on the
तत्त्वार्थाधिगमसूत्र, is well-known.
tion, or application of a rule of देवपथादि a class of words headed by
grammar in accordance with the
words seen in use. See दृष्ट.
दृष्टान्त similar instance,generally quot-
ed to explain effectively some rules
or conventions laid down; cf. ननु
चायमप्यस्ति दृष्टान्तः समुदाये वाक्यपरिसमाक्षि-
the wordदवपथ, the affix कन् applied
to which in the sense of a statue,
or applied for the formation of a
proper noun, is dropped देवपथः,
ईसपथ:, |्वि:, विष्णु: etc.: cf.Kas. om P.
V. 3.100.
रिते | तद्यथा गर्गाः शतं दण्ड्यन्तामिति M.Bh. | देव्ार्मन् a grammarian who has writ-
on P.I. 1. 7.
दृष्टपचनर discrepant, characterized
by discrepancy; cf. यद्यपि तावदयं
परादाब्दो दृष्टापचारः उपसर्गश्चानुपसर्गश्च अयं तु
खळ विद्याब्दंीSदृष्टापचार उपसगे एव: M, Bh.
ten a disquisition on the philoso-
phy of Vyakarana in verse, and
added a commentary of his own
on it which he has named as
समन्वयप्रदीपसंकेत.
on P. 1. 3. 19. देवानन्द्रिन् a Jain grammarian of the
देवताद्वन्द्व a compound word called
द्वन्द्व whose members are names of
deities; the peculiarities of this
Dvandva compound are (a) that
generally there are changes at the
' end of the first member, by virtue
of which it appears similar to a
eighth century who is believed to
have written a grammar work,
called सिद्धान्तसारस्वत-्ाब्दानुदासन. It is
likely that देवनन्दिन् is the same as
देवनान्द-पूज्यपाद and the grammar
work is the same as जेनेन्द्रब्दिानुशासन
for which see देवनान्दन् .

देविकापाद्
देविकापाद् a popular name given to
the third pda of the seventh
= adhyaya of Parinis Asadhyāy as
the pada begins with the Sutra
दविक्रांघ्रिापादेयवाट्दीर्घसत्त्रश्रेयसामात् P.VII
3. 1.
देवीदीन a modern grammarian of the
19th century who has written a
gloss on the Asādhyāy of Panini.
देवेन्द्र a Jain grammarian of the 13th
century who has written a com-
mentary named लघुन्यास on the
ढाब्दानुशासन of Hemacandra. He
has written many works on the
Jain Agamas, of which a commen-
tary on the Uttardhyanastra can
be specially mentioned. He is
called दवेन्द्रसूरि also.
देइा lit. place; (l) original place of
articulation: cf. अदेशे वा वन्वने ब्यञ्ज-
नस्य, R. Pr. KIV. 5; (2) place of
origin; उचारणस्थान: (3) place of
inferential establishment of a
Paribhasa etc. परिभाषादेशाः उद्दा: Par.
Sek. pari. 2,3; (4) passage of the
Sarhhit text, cf..T. Pr. I. 59.
देइीियर् tad. affix देन्ीिय in the sense
of slightly less, or almost similar,
optionally prescribed with the
affixes कप and दद्य e. g. मृदुक्रल्पः,
मृदुदे|्य:. मृदुदर्शयि: cf.Kas, onP.V.3.67.
देद्य (l) tad. affix in the sense of
almost similar; see द्ाीयर् above:
(2) (words) current in popular use
or language, although notsanction-
ed by rules of grammar: cf. देव्याः
सूत्रानबन्धाः क्रियन्त M.Bh. on P. V.
3.55: cf. दद्यां दटब्या: साधुत्वेन प्रतिपाद्या:,
Saiyata on V. 3.55; probably
Kaiyata had a difficulty in ex-
plaining the word दद्य in the old
way meaning * current in use', as
many words called bad words,
introduced from other languages
Were current at his fime wnich he
was reluctant to term asदय.
187
द्युतादि
देव name of a system of grammar or
a work on grammar the peculi-
arity of which is the omission of
the एकाष topic; cf. अनेकशेषं दैवं स्यात्
देवाद्क a root belonging to the
fotirth conjugation of roots.( दिव्-
दिगण ): cf.जसु ताडन इति चुरादे पढत
तस्यदं ग्रेहुणं, न देवादिकरुय, Kas. on P. II
3.56.
देवेन्द्र name given to a work on
grammar, presumably the same as
जेनेद्र-इाब्दानुशासन written by पूज्यपाद-
दवनादन्. See र्जनन्द्रव्याकरण.
दुष (1) a fault of pronunciation; . cf
एताः स्वरदोषभावनाः अतेन्ये व्यञ्जनदेषा:
M.Bh. on I. 1.1 Vart.18 (2) defect
shown in connection with an ex-
pression or explanation.
दोषोद्धरण name of a commentary on
NageSa's Paribhisendusekhara wri-
tten by मनुदेव of the eighteenth
century.
दीषीद्धार name of a commentary on
NageSa's Laghusabdendusekhara
written by मदुदेव of the eighteenth
century.
द्य tad. affix द्य, applid to इदम् in the
sense of * a day ', when इदम् is
changed into अ ( अद् ) ; e. g- अद्य,
cf. P.V. 3.22 Vart. 5.
द्यस् tad. affix द्यस्र, applied to the
word समान when समान is changed
into स: e.g. सद्यः, cf. सद्यः परुत्परार्येषम: P.
V.3.22: cf. also समानस्य सभावे द्यश्चाहृान
P. V. 3.22, Vart. 1
हु a technical term in the Jainendra
Vyakarana for the term उत्तरपद (the
latter or the second member of-a
compound word ) which is used in
Panini's grammar.
द्युताद्ि a class of roots headed by
the root द्युत् , the aorist sign चिल
after which gets ( अ ) अङ्क substi-
tuted for it: e.g. अबुतत् , अश्वितत्: cf.
K8. on P. III.1.55. and I.3.91.

ट्'
G
K
188 व्रत
हुस् tad. affix हुरू applied to the word
उभय in the sense of a day; e.g.
उभयहु: cf. P. V. 3.22 Vart. 7.
द्योतक indicative, suggestive; not
directly capable of expressing the
sense by denotation; the nipatas
and upasargas are sa'd to be fdyo*
taka and not fvacaka' by stand-
ard grammarians headed by the
Varttikakra: cf. निपातस्यानर्थकस्यापि
प्रातिपदिकत्वम् P.I.2.45 Varttika 12: cf.
Kaiyata also on the above; cf also
निपाता द्योतकाः केचित्पृथगर्थाभिधायिनः Vak-
yapadya II. 194;, गतिवाचकत्वमपि तस्य
( स्थाधातोः ) व्यवस्थाप्यते, उपसर्गस्तु तद्ये-
तक्र एव com. on Vakyapadiya II.
190; cf. पश्चाच्छ्रोतुबांधाय चीतंकंपसर्गसंबन्धः
Par. Sek. on Pari. 50; cf also इहृ
स्वरादयो बाचका: चादये द्योतका इति भेदः
Bhs Wp. om P.I.1.37.The Karma-
pravacanjyas are definitely laid
down as dyotaka, cf. क्रियाया द्यूतक्री
नाये न संबन्धस्य वाचक: । नापि क्रियापदाक्षेपीं
संबन्धस्य तु भदकः Vakyapadya II.206:
the case affixes are said to be
any way, *vacaka* or *dyotaka': cf.
वाचिका द्योतिका वा स्युद्वित्वादीनां विभूतयः
Wakyapadiya II. 165.
द्योतन conveyance of sense indirectly
or by suggestion, and not directly.
See -ंतक above.
द्योत्य (sense) conveyed by suggestion
indirectly and not directly ex-
pressed, as in the case of karma-
pravacanjyaS, the krt affixes and
the tad, affixes: cf. अनुळादी लक्षणे
द्योत्ये कर्मप्रवचनीयसंज्ञो भवति Kas. on
P. I. 4.84.
द्रव्य substance, as opposed to गुण pro-
perty and क्रिया action which exist
on dravya. The word सुत्व is used
by Yaska, Panini and other gram-
मnarians in a very general sense
as something in completed forma-
tion or existence as opposed to
*bhava or kriya or verbal activity,
and the word द्रब्य is used by old
grammarians as Synonymous with '
सत्त्व; cf. चादयेSसचे " चादयो निपातसंज्ञा
भवन्ति न वेत्सचै वर्तन्तं, cf. Kas on P.
I. 4.57; cf. S.K. also on P. I.4.57.
(2)The word द्रव्य is also found used
in the sense of an individual
object, as opposed to the genus or
generic notion ( अाकृति ); cf. द्रव्याभि-
धानं ब्याडि:, M. Bh. on P. I. 2. 64.
Vart. 45. (3)The word द्रब्य is found
used in the sense of Sadhana or
means in Tait. Prati. cf. तत्र ढाक्द्-
द्रव्याण्युदाहृरिष्याम: | इाब्दरूपाणि साधनानि ब्-
थिष्याम: Tai, Pr. XXII. 8.
द्रव्यपदार्थिक a grammarian who main-
tair.s that fdravya' or *individual
object is the sense of words: cf.
न ह्याकृतिपदार्थकस्य द्रव्ये न पदार्थीं, द्रव्य-
पदार्थिकस्य वाकृतिर्न पदार्थ: । M. Bh. on
I.2.64 Vart. 53. See द्रव्य.
द्रव्यवचन expressive of substance as
their sense as opposed to गुणवचन:
cf. उभयवचना हेते शुक्रादयः द्रव्यं चाहुगुणं च |
M. Bh. oma P. V.1.119.
द्रव्यवद्भाव behaviour like a dravya as
noticed in the case of the bhava or
kriya found in a root after a krt
afix is added to it cf. कृदभिहृितो
भावो द्रव्यवद्भवति. M. Bh. on II.2.19,
III.1.67 etc.
द्रव्याभिध्यान denotation of द्रब्य or indi-
vidual object as the sense of words
as opposed to आकृत्यभिधान i, e.
denotation of the general form
possessed by objects of the same
class; of द्रव्याभिधानं व्याडः P. I.2.64
Vart. 45. See द्रढय. _
दुत lit. rapid; the vice of rapidity in
utterance;a fault of speech especi-
ally in connection with the uttera-
nce ofvowels in Vedic recital when
on account of haste the utterance
of letters becomes indistinct. cf.
संदृष्टमणीकृतमर्धकं दुतं विक्रीतिमताः स्वरदोषभा-
वनाः । M. Bh. Ahnika 1 Wart. 18.

_
टुतबोध
189
द्वि e
>\ - _
इतबोध्य name of a treatise on gram- !
mar written for beginners by
Bharatasena or Bharatamalla of
Bengal in the sixteemth century.
दुता one of the three Vttis or styles
of utterance mentioned in the
Pratisakhya works and quoted in
the Mahabhya: cf.तिखे दृत्तीरुपदिदन्ति
वाचो विलम्बितां मध्यमां च दुतां च | अभ्यासार्थं
दुतां वृत्तं पृथेोगार्थं तु मध्यमाम् | शिष्याणा-
मुपदट्रार्थं कुर्याद् वृात विलान्विताम् | R. Pr.
XIII. 18, 19;cf. य हि दुतायां वृत्ते वर्णा-
ख्त्रिभागाधिकास्त मध्यमायां, ये मध्यमायां
वर्णास्त्रिभागाधिक्रास्ते विलासिबतायाम् [ M. Bh.
on P. I.1.70, Vart. 4. The utte-
rance of a letter takes ， rd time
more in the मध्यमवृत than in the
दुतवृत, while in the विलम्बितवृत्ति it
takes ， rd more than in the
मध्यमवृात. In short, the utterance of
the same letter takes in the
three vrttis, Druta, Vilambita and
Madhyama the quantity of time
in the proportion of 9:12:16 res-
pectively.
*\ - -__-
द्रोणिका a kind of the position of the
tongue at the time of pronounc-
ing the letter ¶.
द्वन्द्ध name of a compound, formed o F
two or more words used in the
same case, showing their collection
together: cf. वार्थे द्वन्द्वः P. II.2.29.
Out of the four meanings of the
indeclinable व, viz.
अन्वाचय, इतरेतरयोग and समाहृार, the
dval.dva compound is sanctioned
in the last two senses only called
इतरेतरद्वन्द्व (as in प्लक्षन्यग्रोधौ etc.) and
समाहारद्वन्द्व (as in वाक्त्वत्वम् etc.) respec-
tively For details see Mahabhasya
on II.2.29. The dvandva compo-
und takes place only when the
speaker intends mentioning the
several objects together i.e. when
there is, in short, सदृविवक्षा orयुगपदधि-
करणवचनता; cf. अनुस्यूतव भदाभ्यां एका
|
प्रख्येापजायते | यस्यां सहृविवक्षां तामाहुर्मन्त्रैः
कईबयैः | Sr. Pr. II. The gender of
a word in the द्वन्द्वसमास is that of the
last word in the case of the इतरेत-
रद्वन्द्व, while it is the neuter gender
in the case of the समाहारद्वन्द्व.
द्वयसच् tad. affix द्वयस, in the sense of
measure, prescribed optionally
along with the affixes दन and मात्र;
cf. ऊरू: प्रमाणमस्य ऊरुद्वयसम्: Kas. on P.
V. 2.37: fem. ऊरुद्वयसी, cf.P.IV.1.15.
द्वारादि a class of words headed by
the word द्वार् which get the aug-
ment एव् (i.e. पे or औौ ) placed
before the letter य or व in them,
instead of the substitution of
vrddhi, when a taddhita affix mark-
ed with the mute letter -ं, ए or क्
is added to them: e. g. दौवारिक:
सौवास्तक्र:, ईौवम्, शैौवनम् etc.: cf Kas.
on P, VII .3,4.
द्वि a term used for the dual number
in the Prtisakhya works: cf. नो नौ
म मदर्थं त्रिकेषु V. Pr. II. 3 where
Uvvata has explained the words
त्रि, द्वि and एक as बहुवचन, द्विवचन and
एक्वचन respectively.
द्वि: doubled; the term is used in
connection with reduplication in
the Katantra and Haima gram-
mars cf. Hem. IV.1.1, Kat.III 8.
10.
| द्विःप्रयीग doubling, putting a word or
समुचय, ]
word element twice;the words द्वित्व
and द्विर्वचन are used in the same
86th86. _
द्वि:स्पृष्ट a word used many times
synonymously with दु:स्पृष्ट; the
letters , andupadhmaniya(्)
are termed द्वि:स्पृष्ट or दु:स्पृष्ट.
द्विकमेक a term used in connection
with roots governing two objects
or two words in the accusative
case, e.g. दुद् in, गां दोग्धि पयः; the
term कमे according to the strict

कायेयोग
190
द्वित्व
definition of the term कर्तुरीप्सिततमं कर्म
or अाप्यं कर्म applies to one of the
two, which is called the प्रधानक्रमं or
the direct object, the other one,
which, in fact, is related to the ver-
bal activity by relation ofany other
karaka or instrument is taken as
karmakaraka and hence put in
the accusative case.
see Mahabhsya and Kasik on
P.I.4.51. Some roots in their
causal formation govern two
objects out of which one object is
the actual one while the other is
the subject of the primitive root.
e.g. गमयति माणवकं ग्रामम्: बोधयति माणवकं
धर्मम्: cf Ks on P.I.4.52. See for
details Mahabhasya on P. I. 4.52.
कार्ययोग simultaneous occurrence of
two grammaticaloperations result-
ing into a conflict and creating a
doubt as to which of the two
should take place first; cf.द्विकार्ययेगी
हि विप्रतिषेध: M.Bh. on P.I.1.3 Vart.
6; I.1.12; etc. The term विप्रतिषेध
occurring in the rule विप्रतिषेधे परं
क,र्यम् P. I.4.2 is evidently defined
in this way by the word द्विकार्ययोग
in the Mahabhsya.
द्विखण्ड a compound expression or
word separated into two by ava-
graha in the Padapatha; the word
is misstated as दुखण्ड by some
Wedic rcciters.
द्विगु name of a compound with a
numeral as the first member. The
compound is looked upon as a
subdivision of the Tatpurusa com-
Pound- The dvgu compound,
having collection as its general
sense, is declined in the neuter
gender and singular number:
when it ends in अ the fem. affix
ङ is added generally, e. g. पञ्चपात्रम्,
त्रिभुवनम्, पञ्चमूली. The Dvigu com
Pound also takes placewhen a ,
For details ]
karmadharaya compound, having
a word denoting a direction or :
mumeral as its first member, (a)
has a tad. affix added to it e.g.
पञ्चकृपाळः (पुरोडाशः), or (b) has gota
word placed after it in a com-
pound e. g. पश्चगवधन: or (c) has a
collective sense e.g. पञ्चपूली: cf. ताद्व-
ताथांतरपदसमाहृरे चे ( P. II.1.51 ) als,
cf KS. and S. K. om P.II.1.51,52.
द्विगुपाद् a Popular name given by
grammarians to the fourth qua
ter of the second Adhyaya of
Painis Asadhyayi which begins
with the sutra द्विगुरेकवचनम् II. 4.1.
द्वितीय the second consonant in the
five groups of consonants, surd
aspirate, cf. T.Pr. I. 11: V. Pp. .
54, R. Pr. VI. 15; it is called
द्वितीयस्पर्श also.
द्वितीयद्विर्वचन the reduplication of a
root beginning with a vowel
prescribed by the rule अजादेर्द्वितीयस्य
P. VI. 1.2.
द्वितीया the second case the accusa-
tive case, mainly prescribed for a
word which is related as a karma-
karaka to the activity in the sen-
tence; cf P. II. 3.2 to 5,
द्वित्व doubling, reduplication pres-
cribed for (I) a root in the per-
fect tense excepting the cases
where the affix अाम् is added to
the root before the personal end-
ing: e.g. बभूव, चकार, ऊर्णनाव etc.
cf P. VI. 1.1,2; (2) a root before
the Wikarana affixes सुन्, यङ्क, श्ड
and चङ्क e. g. बुभूषति, चेक्रीयत, चर्करीति,
जुहोति, अचीकरत् etc. cf. P. VI. 1.9-
l l ; (3) a word ending in अम् .
( णमुल्ट् ) in the sense of repetition,
e. g. स्मारं स्मारं वक्ष्ये, भोजं भोजं व्रजति cf.
आभीक्ष्ण्ये द्वे भवत: P. VIII. 1.12 Vart.
7; (4) any word (a) in the sense of
comstant or frequent action, (b) in
the sense of repetition, (c) showing

<<
द्विदण्ड्यादि
reproach, or scorn, or quality in
the sense of its incomplete possess-
ion, or (d) in the vocative case at ]
the beginning ofa sentence in sorme
specified senses; reduplication is
also prescribed for the prepositions
परि, प्र, सम्, उप, उद्, उपरि, अधि, अघम्
in some specified senses cf
P. VIII. 1.1 to 15. A letter ex-
cepting हृ and र्, is also repeated,
if so desired, when (a) it occurs
after the letter ， or ， which is pre-
ceded by a vowel e g. अर्कः अद्धम्
etc. cf VIII. 4.46: or when (b) it
is preceded by a vowel and follow-
ed by a consonant e. g. दद्धयंत्र,
मद्धवत्र cf. P. VIII. 4.47 * For
details see Ka8. on VIII. 4.46-52.
The word द्वित्व is sometimes used
in the sense of the dual number;
cf. Kas. on P. I.2.51. The words
द्वित्व, द्विवेचन and द्विरुक्त are generally
used as synonyms. Panini generally
uses the word द्व. For द्वित्व in Wedic
Literature cf. R. Pr. VI. 1.4; T.
Pr. XIV. 1-8 V, Pr. IV. 101-118.
द्विदण्ड्यादि a class of words, which
are headed by the word द्विदण्डि
and which are all bahuvrtihi com-
pounds, to which the affix इ is
found added as a Samasanta affix
e. g- द्विदण्डि:, सपदि etc.: cf Kas. on
P. W. 4.128.
fद्वरुक्ति repetition of a word, or of a
letter or of a root. See द्वित्व.
द्वखचारण phonemic utterance a
second time; see द्विल्व.
द्विरूपवत् phonemically repeated; see
द्वित्व
मू repetition, reduplication. See
त्व.
द्विर्वचन see द्वित्व and द्विरुक्ति; the word
is very frequently used in the
Mahabhsya instead of द्वित्व. cf.
M Bh on I. 1. Ahnika 1, I. 1.7,
10, 57, 59. etc. etc.
191
द्विहृल्
द्विवचन a case affix of the dual num-
ber: dual number; a word in the
dual number; cf M. Bh.9 -
1,11, T. 4.21 etc.: cf. द्वयोरर्थयेवैचनं
द्विवन्वनम् K8. on P. V. 3.57.
द्विवचस् a word in the dual number ;
cf. षष्ठादयश्च द्विवचीन्तभाज: R. Pr. I. 28
where the word द्विवचमूम् is explain-
ed as द्विवचनाभिधायिन: by Uvvata-
द्विचत् a syllable consisting of two
consonants; cf. R. T. 245.
द्विवर्ण (1) a repeated consonant: cf.
द्विवर्णभेकवर्णवत्, V. Pr. IV. 44: (2)
doubling, repetition: cf इस्वपूर्वे
डकारो द्विवर्णम् T. Pr. IX. 18: cf. also
T. Pr. XIV. 1, R. Pr. IX. 18.
द्विस् double reduplicated; the word
is frequently used in connection
with doubling of consonants or
words in the PratiSakhya Litera-
ture as also in the Katantra,
Sakatayana and Haima grammars
cf. R. Pr. VI. 1, KV. 5, V. Pr.
IV. 101, R, T. 264: cf. also Kat.
III. 8.10, Sak. IV. 1.43; Hem.
IV. 1.1.
द्विसन्धि a kind of विवृत or interval of
time in the pronunciation of two
consecutive vowels, which as a
result of two euphonic changes
has a vowel preceded by a vowel
and followed also by a vowel:
e. g. अभूदुभा उ अन्व, R. Pr. II. 44.
possessed of two vowels, dis-
syllabic: cf. न पद द्विस्वरे नित्यम् T.
Pr. XVI. 17.
द्विस्स्पृष्ट a term used for an
upadhmaniya letter or a phonetic
glement resulting from a visarga
followed by_the letter ， or .
See उपध्मानीय.The word is also useत
sometimes for the pronunciation ढ
of इ, and व्दू of दृ. See दुःस्पृष्ट. _
possessed of two consecutive
consonants cfतस्मालुड् द्विहृलः, P. VII.
* 7l : cf also M. Bh. on VI. 1.68.

धम्
]92
9_rx~
धमंक्रांतं
द्वेधम् used adverbially for द्विधा
in'the sense of *optionally' or in
two ways': cf. द्वेधे इाब्दानामप्रतिपत्तिः
M. Bh. on P. I. 1. 44 Wart. 15.
दूपद् group of two words; an express-
ion consisting of two words; cf न
बीन्वं नः सुमना द्वपदाश्च R. Pr. VIII. 2.
10; X. 3; XI. 37 etc.
द्यच् a word possessed of two
vowels in it; dissyllabic words; the
word is frequently used in Prinis
Astadhyayi and Patajali's Mah-
bhsya, Kasika Vrtti and other
works om Panini's grammar.
द्यादि a class of pronouns headed
by the pronoun द्वि to which the
taddhita affixes called विभक्ति, as
prescribed by the rules of Panini
in the rule पञ्चम्यास्तासेल् and the
following ones, are not added. cf.
P. V. 3. 2.
द्वष्मन name of a Sarhdhi made up
of two spirants, or resulting in the
presence of two spirants or Usman
letters e.g. निष्षिध्बरी:, स्वस्साता: cf. R.
Pr. XI. 22.
ध
ध्य् (I) fourth letter of the dental
class(तवर्ग) possessed of the proper-
ties नादानुप्रदान, घोष, कण्ठसंवृतत्व and
मइत्राण: (2) substitute ， for the हृ of
न before a * jhal ' consonant or
at the end of a word e. g. नद्धम्,
उपानत्, cf. P. VIII. 2. 34: (3)
substitute ध् for the letters त् and थ्
placed after a fourth letter, e. g
लब्धुम्, देग्धा etc. cf. P. VIII. 2. 40.
ध a technical term in the Jainen-
dra Vyakarna for the term सर्व-
नामरुथान ofPanini used for the first
five case affixes सु, ओ, असु, अम्, ओ
and इ (nom. and acc. pl. neuter
gender); cf P. I. I. 42, 43.
धनञ्जत् name of the author ofa short
metrical treatise on roots named
धातुक्रल्पलतिक्रा.
ध्यमुञ्जम् tad. affix optionally substitu-
ted in the place of the tad. affix धा
after the words द्वि and त्रि: e. g.
द्विधा, दूधम्, त्रिधा, त्रैधम्: cf. P. V. 3.45.
धरणीधर a grammarian of the six-
teenth century at the court of
Udayasimha who wrote a commen-
tary on the sutras of Panini which
was named वैयाकरणसर्वस्व as also a
commentary on the Siks of Panini.
धमे defined as ऋषिसंप्रदाय, the tradi-
tional practices laid down by the
sages for posterity; cf.केवलमृषिसेप्रदायेो
धर्म इति कृत्वा याज्ञिक्रा: इाखेत्रेण अनुविदधत M.
Bh. I. 1. Ahnika I ; cf also धर्मज्ञास्त्रं
in एवे च कृत्वा धर्मशास्त्रं प्रवृत्तम्, M. Bh.
gn P. I. 2.64, as also धर्मसूत्रकाराः in
नैवश्वर् आज्ञापयति नापि धर्मसूत्रक्रीराः पठन्ति
अपघदैरुत्सर्गाः बाध्यन्तामिति M. Bh. on I.
l.47; (2) religious merit, cf. धर्मापदे-
दानमिदं शास्त्रमास्मन्ननवयवेन शास्त्रार्थः संप्रतीयत,
M. Bh. on P. WH. I. 84, cf also
ज्ञान घमै इति चतथाSधमे: M. Bh. I. 1.
Ahnika l ; ' 3) property possessed
by a thing or a letter or a word.
e. g. वर्णधर्म; cf Kas. on P.
[ I. 2.29; cf also Ks. on P. II. 1,
55, II. 3.33, VIII. 1. 4. cf. also
B. Pr. III. 8, 13 XIV. 1 etc.:
( 4 ) the characteristic of being
in a substatce; in the phrase अयं
घटः the dharma viz.घटत्व is predica-
ted of this (इदम्) or, in other words
the designation pot ( घटसंज्ञा ) is the
predication; the explanation in
short, can be given as घटत्वबान् इदं-
पदार्थ: or घटाभिन्नः इदंपदार्थ:
धमेकीर्ति a Jain scholar called by
the name कीर्ति also, who was the
author of धातुप्रत्ययपञ्जिक्रा and रूपावतार
a well-known treatise on roots;
cf. बपदेवमह्याग्राह्यग्रस्तो वामनदिग्गज: | कीर्तिरेव
सङ्गन माधवेन समुद्धृत:| He is believed

धर्मिन् 193 .
घातु
to have been the first grammarian
who arranged the sutras of Panini
according to the subject matter.
धर्मिन् (1)a thing possessed of proper-
ties, द्रव्य: cf. धर्मदाब्देन धम भण्यते Kas.
on P.III.3.77;cf also the common
expression धर्मिग्राह्यक्रमानात् Par. Sek.
on Pari. 55, 66, 79, 82: (2) the
same as dharma in rare cases
according to the dictum धमेघर्मिणे-
रभदीपचारः e. g. वर्णकं देहि, पुराणैकं दहृि:
cf. Durghata Vr. om P, II. 1. 49.
धा tad.affix (l) applied to a numeral
in the sense of a kind ( प्रकार ) or a
division of time, e.g.एकधा, द्विधा, त्रिधा
etc.: cf. P.V.3.42, 43; (2) applied
to बहु to show divisions of a short
time;e.g. बहुधा दिवसस्य भुङ्क्त and बहुधा
मासस्य भुङ्क्ते;cf. Kas. on P.V.4.20.
घाठ a root; the basic word of a
verbal form,defined by the Bhsya-
kara as क्रियावचना धातु: or even
as भाववचने धातु:, a word denoting
a verbal activity. Panini has
not defined the term as such,
but he has given a long list of
roots under ten groups, named
daSagani, which includes about
2200 Foots which can be called
primary roots as contrasted with
secondary roots. The secondary
roots can be divided into
two main groups ( l ) roots
derived from roots ( धातुजधातवः )
and (2) roots derived from nouns
( नामधातव: ). The roots derived
from roots can further be classified
into three main subdivisions : (a)
causative roots or णिजन्त, (b) desi-
derative roots or सन्नन्त, (c) inten-
sive roots or यडन्त and यङ्लुगन्त:
while roots derived from nouns or }
denominative roots can further be
divided into क्यजन्त, काम्यजन्त, क्यडन्त,
क्यषन्त, णिडन्त, किबन्त and the misce
llaneous ones ( प्रकीर्ण ) as derived
from nouns like कण्ड् ( कङ्कादि ) by
25
the application of the affix यक् or
from nouns like सत्य,वेद, पादा, मुण्ड,मिश्र,
etc. by the application of the
affix णिच्. Besides these, there are
a few roots formed by the applica-
tion of the affix अाय and ईय (ईयङ्क).
All these roots can further be
classified into Parasmaipadin or
Parasmaibhasa, Atmanepadin or
Atmanebhasa and Ubhayapadin.
Roots possessed of a mute grave
( अनुदात्त ) vowel or of the mute
consonant ङ्क added to the root in
the Dhatupatha or ending in the
affixes यड्, क्यङ्क etc. as also roots
in the passive voice are termed
Atmanepadin: while roots ending
with the affix णिच् as also roots
possessed of a mute circumflex
vowel or a mute consonant ञ्म् appl-
ied to them are termed Ubhaya-
padin. All the rest are termed
Parasmaipadin. There are some
other mute letters or syllables
applied by Panini to the roots in
his Dhatupatha for specific purpo-
ses; e.g. ए at the end to signify
prohibition of vrddhi to the penu-
ltimate अ in the aorist, e.g. अक्रखीत्
cf. P. VII.2.5; इर् to signify the
optional substitution of अ or अङ्क
for the affix क्लि of the aorist, e.g.
अभिदत्, अमैत्सीत् ; cf. P.III. 1.57; उ
to signify the optional application
of the augment इ ( इट् ) before क्त्वा
e.g. द्रामित्वा, शान्त्वा; cf. P.VII. 2. 56;
ऊ to signify the optional applica-
tion of the augment इ ( इट् ) e.g.
गीता, गेीपिता, cf. P.VII.2.44: अा to
signify the prohibition of the aug-
ment इट् in the case of the past
pass. part. e.g. क्ष्विण्ण:, स्विन्न:, cf. P.
VII.2.16; इ to signify the addition
of a nasal after the last vowel e. g.
निन्दति from निदि, cf. P. VII.1.58: ऋ
to signify the prohibition of हृस्व to
the penultimate long vowel before

णिव्र, e. g. अॅासत्, cf. PWII. 4.2;ल
tosignify the substitution ofअई
for लिंin the aorist, e.g. अगमत् cf
P. III.1.55: ओ to signify the sub-
stitution of न् for त् of the past
pass.part. e.g. लग्नः, अापन:, मू:नः
हेtc.:T cf. P. VIII. 2.45. Besides
these,the mute syllablesञ्जि, इ and ड
are prefixed for specific purposes
cf. P, III.2.187, III.3.89 and III.
8,88. The term धातु is a suffici-
ently old one which is taken by
Phini from ancient grammarians
and which is found used in the
Nirukta and the Pratisakhya
works, signifying the elemental
(radical)base for nouns whichare
all derivable from roots according
to the writers ofthe Nirukta works
and the grammarian Skaayana;
cf. नाम च धातुजमाह निरुक्त ब्याकरणे शकटस्य
च तीक्रम् M. Bh. on P. III.3.1. Some
scholars have divided roots into
six categories; cf. तत्र धातवः षोढा
(a) परिपाठताः भूवाद्य:, (b) अपरिपठतां
अान्दछयत्याद्य:, (c) परिपठितारिपीठता:
( सूत्रपठिताः ) कुरुक्रम्भस्तम्भेत्यादयः, (d)
प्रत्ययधातव: सनाद्यन्ता:, (e) नांमघातवः
कधूदयः, () प्रत्ययनामधातवः हेडगब्भुट्टी-
बप्रभृतय:; cf Srihgra Prak. I. For
details see M.Bh. on P.I.3.I as
also pp 255, 256 Vol. VII Vy-
karana-Mahabhasya published by
the D.E. Society, Poona.
धातुकल्पलतिका a short treatise on the
roots of the different conjugations
written by a grammarian named
Dhanafijaya.
घातुकरिकावली agrammatical work in
verse written by Varadarja, the
pupil of Bhattoj Diksita who iived
in the 17th century, Besides
Karikvali, Varadarja wrote
लघुकौमुदी and मध्यक्रीमुद also.
घातुदीपिका (l) name of a comment-
ary on the Kavikalpadruma of
194
घातुप्रर्दप .
Bopadeva by Rimalarhkra: (2)
name of a commentary on the
Kavikalpadruma by Durgadasa
who wrote a commentary on
the Mugdhabodha also.
धातुपाठ (1) name given in general to
the several collections of roots
given generally with their mean-
ings by grammarians belonging
to the various different schools of
grammar. These collections are
given as necessary appendices
named खिल to their grammars by
the well known grammarians of
Sanskrit such as Panini, Skap-
yana, and others (2) a small trea-
tise on roots written by Bhimasena
of the 14th century.
धातुपाठवृत्ति a commentary on the
Dhatupatha by Nagesa.
धातुपारायण a grammatical treatise
dealing with roots written as a su
pplementary work by Jumaranan-
din to his grammar work called
Rasavati,which itself was a thorou-
ghly revised and enlarged edition
of the रसवती a commentary written
by Kramadsvara on his own gram-
mar named संक्षिप्तसार.]umaranandin
is believed to have been a Jain
writer who lived in the fifteenth
century A.D.
घाठप्रकारा a work dealing with roots
Written as a supplementary work
by Balarma-Paficanana to his
own grammar named Prabodha-
Praksa.
धातुप्रत्ययपञ्जिका a work dealing with
verbal forms written by Dharma
kirti, a Jain grammarian of the
eighth century.
धातुप्रदीप a work dealing with verbal
forms written by Maitreya Rak-
sita, a Buddhist writer and a
famous grammarian belonging to
the eastern part of India who

घातुमञ्जरी
lived in the middle of the twelfth
century. He is believed to have
written many scholarly works in
connection with Panini's grammar
out of which the Tantrapradipa is
the most important one. The
work Dhtupradipa is quoted by
Saraadeva, who was a contem-
porary of Maitreya Raksita, in his
Durghagavtti on P. II. 4. 52.
घातुमञ्जरी called also धातुसंग्रहृ attribut-
ed to a grammarian namcd K5-
natha.
धातुमाल a work on roots in verse-
form attributed to a grammarian
named ISwarak5nta.
धातुरत्नमञ्जरी a treatise dealing with
roots believed to have been written
by Ramasimhavarman.
धातुरत्नाकर a work dealing with roots
believed to have been written by
Narayana who was given the title
वन्द्य. He lived in the seventeenth
century : a work named सारावलि-
ब्य्ाक्ररणा is also believed to have been
written by him.
a short list of the impor-
tant roots from the Dhatuptha of
Panini, given in verse by चेक्नथ a
grammarian of the 17th century.
धातुलोप an elision of a portion of a
root: cf. न धातुलेप अार्धधातुके, P.I.1 4.
धातुवृत्ति a general term applied to a
treatise discussing roots, but speci-
fically used in connection with the
scholarly commentary written by
Madhavacārya, the replated scholar
and politician at the court of the
Vijayanagara kings in the four-
teenth century, on the Dhatupatha
ot Paini. The work is generally
referred to as माधवीया-धातुवृति to
distinguish it from ordinary com-
mentary works called also धातुवृत्ति
written by grammarians like
Wijayananda and others.
195
धान्यपाद्
धातुव्याकरण a grammar dealing with
Verbs believed to have been written
by Vafgasena
घातुसेबन्धपाद् conventional name given
6 the fourth pda of Paninis
Adhyay which begins with the
Stra धातुसंबन्धे प्रत्ययाः P. III.4.1
धातूपद्ज्ञा enumeration or recital of '
roots in the Dhtupatha;cf. प्रकृत्युप-
पदेसुपाधयश्चेापदिष्टाः क् धातूपदेशे प्रातिपदिकी-
पदेई व | M. Bh. om P. III. ]. 1.
धात्वर्थे lit. meaning of a root, the
verbal activity, mamed त्रिया or भावः .
cf. धात्वर्थः क्रियां: M. Bh. on III.2.
84, III.2.115. The verbal activity
is described generally to be made
up of a series of continuous sub-
ordinate activities carried on by
the different karakas or agents
and instruments of verbal activity
helping the process of the main
activity. When the process of the
verbal activity is complete, the
completed activity is looked upon
as a substantive or drawya and a
word denoting it, such asपाक,or याग
does not get conjugational affixes,
but it is regularly declined like a
noun Justas स्वार्थ, द्रब्य, लिङ्ग, संख्या,
and कारक are given as प्रातिपदिकार्थ,
in the same manner क्रिया, काल, पुरुष,
वचन or संख्या, and कारक are given as
धात्वर्थ, as they are shown by a
verbal form, although strictly
speaking verbal activity (क्रियorभाव)
alone is the sense of a root, as
stated in the Mahbhasya. For
details see Vaiyak.Bh.Sra, where
it is said that fruit ( फल) and effort
( ब्यापार ) are expressed by a root,
cf. फलव्यापारयेघतुः. The five senses
given above are in fact conveyed
uot by a root, but by a verb or
अाख्यात or तिडन्त.
" धान्यपाद a popular name given to the

धारण
196
ये
second pada of the fifth adhyaya
of Pninis Astadhyy possibly
because the pda begins with the
Stra धान्यानां भवने क्षेत्रे खञ्ज, P. V.2.1.
धारण (1) suppression of a consonant,
out of two successive consonants
which is looked upon as a
fault of recital; e.g. हृयामि when
recited as वयाम; ef. धारणमनुपलब्धिः
Uvvata on R.Pr.XIV. 6; (2) repe-
tition of a consonant which is also
a fault: e.g. ज्ज्येतिष्कृत् for ज्योतिष्कृत्:
cf. Uvvata onXIV.6;cf. alsoधारयन्त;
परक्रमं etc. explained by Uvvata as
विलम्बमानाः परक्रमं कुर्वन्ति where धारयन्तः
means *lengthening or"prolonging'
cf. R.Pr. on XIV.23; (3) the pecu-
llar position of the mouth (मुखसं-
घारणम् ) by which a double conso-
nant is recited as a single one, cf.
द्विवर्णमेकवर्णवत् ( एकप्रयत्ननिर्वत्र्य ) धारणात्
e.g. ब्याप्तम् , कुक्कुट:, cf. V.Pr. IV.144.
fध (I)a technical term used for sonant
consonants in the Pratisakhya and
old grammar works; cf. धि शेषः W.
Pr,I.53, explained by Uvvata as
वर्गाणां उत्तरास्त्रय: यरलवहृकाराश्च धि: V.Pr.
I.53; the term धि corresponds to
हृम् of Panini: (2) personal ending
fध substituted for.हुि of the impera.
2nd sing. e.g. जुहुधि, छिन्द्धि, भिन्द्धि,
श्रुधि, रारन्धि etc.: cf.P.V.4.101-103.
ठ a technical term in the Jainendra
Vyakarana for धातु (a root) which
is used freely by the ancient gra-
mmarians and Panini.
डद (IDthe augment ， prefixed to the
consonant सुल् following upon the
consonant ङ्क or न् occurring at the
end of a word;e.g. श्वलिट्त्सय,
मह्यान्त्साये etc.; cf. P. VIII.3.29: (2)
technical short term for घातु (root):
the technical term is धुट् , but the
मaorm. sing. used is धुट्: (3) a
technical terrma standing for con-
sonants excepting semi-vowels and
nasals; cf. धुटश्च धुटि Kat. III.6.51.
The term is used in the Katantra
Vyakarana. It corresponds to the
term इर् of Panini.
धुना tad. affix called Wibhakti tad.
affix, applied to the word
when इदम् is changed into अ; cf.
इदमः अश्भावः धुना च प्रत्ययः Kद्वS. on P.
V. 3.17.
धुष् a short term for धातु or root.See धुट्,
a class of words headed by
the word धूम to which the tad.affix
अक्र ( बुञ् ) is added in the miscella-
neous(ईौषिक ) senses; e. g. घौमक्रः
खाण्डक्र: etc.; cf Kas. on P.IV.2.127.
धृत or घृतप्रचय a kind of original
gravevowel turned into a circum-
flex one which is called प्रचय umless
followed by another acute or
circumflex vowel. The Taittiriya
Prtisakhya has mentioned seven
varieties of this *pracaya out of
which धृतप्रचय or धृत is one. For
details see Bhasya on दृतः प्रचयः
क्रौण्डिन्यस्य, T.Pr.XVIII.3.
धय tad. affix धय applied to the words
भाग, रूप and नाम in the same sense
as those words possess;e.g.भागधयम् ,
cf. Kas. on P. V.4.25.
ध्मात name of a fault in the pronun-
ciation of a vowel when on
account of fullness of breath it
appears as uttered long (दीर्ध ),
although really it is short; cf.
श्वासभूयिष्ठतया हृस्वोपि दधे इव लक्ष्यते,
Kaiyata on I. 1. Ahmika 1- Vart.
18.
ध्यम tad. affix ध्यमुञ्ज substituted for
घा optionally after the word एक
e. g. एकध्यम् , एकघा; cf. P. V. 3.44.
ध्ये krt afix ध्यै seen in Vedic Lite-
rature, substituted for त्या option-
ally: e, g. साढयै, साङ्ग्बां; cf P. V.
3.113. - -

धुव
धुव (1) fixed,stationary, as contrasted
with moving (बुव) which is termed
अपादान and hence put in the abla-
tive case; cf धुवमपायेपादानम् P. I.
4.24: (2) repeated sound ( नाद )
of a third or a fourth consonant
of the class consonants when it
occurs at the end of the first
word of a split up compound
word; cf. R. Pr. VI. l l and
XI. 24.
भ्रौव्य fixed; of a stationary nature;
of क्तीsधिकरणे च ध्रौव्यगतिप्रत्यवसानार्थेभ्य:
P. III. 4.76. -*
ध्वनि (1) sound: cf. ध्वनिं कुर्वनेवमुच्यत-
राब्दं कुरु शब्दं मा कार्ष: M. Bh. I. 1.
Ahnika 1; cf. also Vak. Pad. I.
77; cf. also रूफाटः इाव्द:, ध्वनिः इाब्दगुण:,
M.Bh. on I. 1.70 Vव्रrt. 5. ध्वनिor
sound is said to be the indicator
(सूचक्र or ब्यञ्जक) ofस्फुट the eternal
sound.
ध्वनित suggested, as opposed to उक्त
expressed; the word is found fre-
quently used in the Paribhsen-
dusekhara and other works in
connection with such dictums as
are not actually made, but indi-
cated in the Mahabhasya.
ध्वम् personal-ending of the sec.
Pers pl. Atmanepada, substituted
for ळ of the 10 lakar.s.
|्वात् personal-ending in Vedic
Literature, substituted for ध्वम् of
the sec pers. pl. Atmanepada:
g:g..वारय्वात् for वारयध्वम् cf. P.
VII. 1.42.
प्नान the second out of the sevaa
Positions of voice in the Veda
recital which are-उपांशु, ध्वान, निमद,
उपादमत्, मन्द्र, मध्यम andतं|र.
वे Personal-ending of the sec. pers.
Pl. Atmanepada in the present
and perfect tenses.
197 न
न fifth consonant of the dental class
of consonants which is possessed
of the properties घोष, नादानुप्रदान,
अल्पप्राणत्व, संवृतकण्ठत्त्र and अानुनासिक्य. In
Panini's grammar the nasal conso-
nant न (a)is added as an augment
prescribed\ \नुट् or नुम् which
originally n as न्, but after-
wards changed into अनुस्वार or
परसवर्ण as redired, as for example
in पयांसि, य्, निन्दति, वन्दति etc.;
cf. P. VII. 1.58-73, VII. 1.79-
83; VIII. 3.24; (b) is changed
into ण् when it directly follows
upon ऋ, ऋ, र् or ， or even
intervened by a vowel, a
' semivowel except च् , a guttural
consonant, a labial consonant
or an anuswara; cf. P. VIII.
4.1.1-31. (c) is substituted for the
final म of a root, e. g. प्रशान, प्रतान्
cf. P. VIII. 2.64, 65.
न (l) the consonant न् (see न् above)
with the vowel added to it for
facility of utterance, cf. T. Pr.
I. 21 ; (2) tad. affix न added to
words headed by पामन् in the sense
of Possession: e.g. पामन:, हेमन: etc.,
cf P. V. 2.100; (3) tad. affix न as
found in the word ज्येोत्स्ना derived
from ज्येोतिष्, cf P. V. 2.1I4; (4)
uadi affix न as found in th8
wordल्येोनः: cf Ks on P. VI.4.19:
(9 the krt affix नङ्क as also ननं
prescribed after the roots यज्, याच्,
यत्, विच्, प्रच्, रक्षु and स्वपू , e g. यज्ञ:,
पृच्न, प्रभ: etc., cf P. III. 3.90, 91:
{?) thenggative particle न givefi
by Panini as न्न् and referredo in
the same way, which (i.e. न.) when
compounded with a following
Word is changed into अ or अन् o
rctaincd in rare cases as for in-
*्%in नाट्, नासत्यौ, नक्षत्रम् etc.
cfPWI.3.73-75;(7) tad.affix ने (नम्)

नकार
applied to the words खत्री and स्
in senses given from P. IV. 1.92 to
V. 2.1 e. g. त्रैणं, पेरुनम् cf. IV. 1-87.
नकार the consonant न to which the
vowel अ and the affix कार् are
added for facility of utterance;
e. g. तथा नकार उदय नक्ररे R. Pr.
IV. -: cf. V. Pr. I. 17, 21.
नङ्क kpt affix न applied to the roots
येजु, याच्, यत् and others in the sense
of verbal activity; e. g. यज्ञ; याच्ञ्जा,
यत्न: etc. cf. P. III. 3.90, 9i. See
न (5).
नज्ञिङ्क kpt. affix न् applied to the
roots स्वप्, वृष् and वृ in the sense
of * habituated' e. g. स्वप्नक् धृष्णकू:
See Ks. on P. HII. 2.172.
न， the negative particle ( न् )
which possesses the six senses
which are sketched as सादृश्ये तदभावश्च
तदन्यत्वं तदल्पता ， अप्रादारुत्यं विरोधश्च नञ्जथ:
षट् प्रकीर्तिताः and which are res-
pectively illustrated by the
examples अनिकु: शर:, भूतले घटो नास्ति,
अघट: पट:, अनुदरमुदरं तरुण्या:, अब्राह्मण
वाईषिकः and असुर: दैत्य: | See न (6).
नञ्तत्पुरुष a compound with न as its
first member which is changed into
अ or अन, or remains unchanged,
the indeclinable न (नञ्ज ) possessing
any one of the six senses given
above under न (6); e. g अब्राह्मणः,
अनश्वः, नमुचिः etc.; cf. P. VI. 3
73-77.
नञ्समास a compound with न (नम् )
as its first member; the termis
found used in the Mahabhasya
for both the नञ्तत्पुरुष as well as the
नञ्बहुव्रीहृि compounds; cf. M.Bh.on
P.I.4.1 Vart, 19, also on P. II.1.1.
नञ्स्वरबलीयस्त्व the superiority, or
strength of the accent caused by
नञ्समास which sets , aside the
accent caused by the case affix:
cf. विभक्तिस्वरान्नञ्स्वरो बलीयान् P. VI,
2.158 Vart. 13,
198
नदी
नडादि (l) a class of words headed by
the word नड to which the tad.affix
अयन ( क् ) is added in the sense
of गीत्र ( grandchild and further
descendants); e. g, नाडायनः, चारायणः:
cf. Ks. on P, IV.1. 99; (2) a class
of words headed by नड to which
the affix ईय (छ) is added, together
with the augment क placed after
the word and before the affix, in
the four senses prescribed in P.
IV.2. 67-70; e.g. नडकीयम् , प्रिक्षक्रीयम्:
cf. Kas. on P. IV. 2. 91*
नत cerebralized" changed into .
The change of the consonant ने
into णु is called नति in the old
Prtisakhya works; cf. स्पई वोष्मणि
चानते R. Pr. IV. 11.
नात lit.inclination, bending down;the
word is used generally in the tec-
hnicalsense of*cerebralization but
applied to the change of न into ण्
as also that of र into ष्: cf. दन्त्यस्य
मूर्धन्यापत्तिर्नति:, V. Pr.I. 42. The root
नम् is used in the sense of * cere-
bralizing ' or * being cerebraliz-
ed ? very frequently in the Pratis्-
khya works; e. g the word नम्यते
is used in the sense of * is cerebra-
lized '; नमयति in the sense of
*cerebralizes and नामिंन् in the
sense of * causing cerebralization ';
cf. ऋकारादयो दश नामिन: स्वराः, पूर्वे
नन्ता नेतिषु नम्यमुत्तरम् R. Pr. I. 27.
नदीa technical term applied in Panini's
grammar to words in the feminine
gender ending in ई and ऊ excep-
ting a few like खत्री,श्री, धू and others
it is optionally applied to words
ending in इ and उ, of course in
the fem. gender, before case affix-
es of the dative, ablative, genitive
and locative sing. The term was
probably in use beforePanini and
was taken from the fem. word नदी
which was taken as a model. Very

नद्ध
199
नरेन्द्रसूरि
probably there was a long !st of
words fike नद् ( नदट्) चेर ( चेर्ट् )
etc. which were given as ending
in ट् and to which the afix ई (डम्)
was added for forming the femi-
nine base;the first word नदी so
formed, was taken as a model and
all words in the list and similar
others were called नदी: cf P. I
4. 3-6.
नद्ध a fault of pronunciation when a
letter, although distinctly prono-
unced inside the mouth, does not
become audible, being held up
( बद्ध ) by the lips or the like The
fault is similar to अम्दूकृत: cf ओीठ-
भ्यामम्वृकृतमाहृ नद्धम् R.Pr.xiV.2. '
नद्यादि a class of words headed by नदी,
मई and other fem. nouns to which
the taddhita affix एय (दृक्) is added
in the miscellaneous ( तैबिक्र ) senses;
e.g. नादेयम्, मह्यम्, वाराणसेयम्, श्रावर्त्तयम्
etc.; cf. KS. on P.IV.2.97.
नन् krt affix न applied to the root रुवम्
to show verbal activity ; e.g. स्मः
cf.P.III.3.91.
नन्ढ one that causes cerebralization;
cf. पूर्वे नन्ता नतिषु नम्यमुत्तरम् R.Pr.I.27.
See नति.
नन्दसुन्द्र a Jain grammarian who
wrote a gloss (अबवृरि) on the हेमशब्द-
नुढासनवृति.
नन्दिकेश्वर an ancientgrammarian who
has written a short work in verses
on grammar in general, which is
named नन्दकेश्वरकारिकासूत्र. There is
a scholarly commentary upon it
written by उपमन्यु. _
नन्दिकेश्वरकारिका a short treatise of28
stanzas, attributed to an ancient
grammarian नन्दिकेश्वर, which gives
a philosophical interpretation of
the fourteen sitras attributed to
God Siva. The authorship of the
treatise is assigned traditionally to
the Divine Bull of God Siva. See
नन्दिकेश्वर. The treatise is also named
नन्दिकेश्वरकारिकासूत्र.
नन्द्किंश्चरक्रार्काविवरण called also
नन्दिकेश्वरकारिकाटीका a gloss written
by Upamanyu on नान्दकेश्वरकारिका.See
नान्द्वेश्वरकारिक्रा.
, नन्द्यदि name giver to the class
of roots beginning with the root
नन्द्, which includes the rootsवा,
मद् , दू， वृध् , ऋभु and others as given
inh8Ganapaha.These roots have
the affix ल्युi.e. अन added to then
in the sense of agent e.g. न्न:
वैईनेः, मदनः, वर्धनः दंीभन:, रमण:, दुर्मणः,
जनादः, यवनः etc.; cf. P.III.1.13#.
नपुंसक 1it. a word which is neither in
the masculine nor in the feminine
gender: a wordin thg euter
gender; cf. R.Pr.%III.7,V. Pr. II.
ई2: III.138: cf P. VI.3.75, on
which the Siddhanta Kaumudi
observes न स्त्री पुमान् नपुंसकम् | स्त्रीपुंसयेो:
पुसकभावो निपातनात् ?
नपुंसकस्वरे the special accent viz. the
acute accent for the first vowel
for nouns in the neuter gender
excepting those that end in इट्, as
prescribed by नविषयूल्यानिसन्त्य
Phitsप्tra 1 ] ; cf. नपुंसक्रस्वरो मा भूत्
M.Bh. on P.VII.1.77. _
नस्य capable of being cerebralized.
See नति.
न， person; personal ending; the term
is used in connection with (the
affixes of) the three persons प्रथम,
मध्यम, and उत्तम which are promisc-
uously seen sometimes in the
Vedic Literature cf. सुतिङ्कपग्रहृ-
लिङ्गनराणां ... व्यत्ययमिच्छति ... M. Bh.
on III.1.85.
नरेन्द्रसूरि an old grammarian believed
to have been the original writer of
the Sarasvata Vyakarana, on the
strength of references to him in

नरेन्द्राचार्य
200
K
नागांइा
the commentary on the Sirasvata
Vyakarata written by क्षेमेन्द्र as also
references in the commentary on
the Prakriykaumudi by Vittha-
1esa. He is believed to have lived
in the tenth century A:D.
नरेन्द्रचाये the same as नेरन्द्रसूरि. See
नलोप elision of न्, which in Pahini's
grammar is sometimes taken as
valid for certain grammatical
operations,and otherwise for other
operations; cf. नलेपः सुप्स्वरसंज्ञातुग्विधिषु
कृति P.VIII.2.2.
नवगर्णी a term used in connection
with the first nine gataas or conju-
gations given by Panini in his
Dhtupagha, the tenth conjuga-
tion being looked upon as a secon-'
dary conjugation.
नवाङ्गकीं name given to the first nine
Ahnikas or lessons of the Mah-
bhasya which are written in expla-
. nation of only the first pada of the
first Adhyaya ofPanini's Asdhyay
and which contain almost all the
important theories, statements and
problems newly introduced by
Pataijali.
नंदयमठत a term used for the differen-
tiation in views and explanations
held by the comparatively new |
school of Bhattoj Dikita, as con-
trasted with those held by Kasik-
kara and Kaiyata: the term is
sometimes applied to the differ-
ences of opinion expressed by
Nagesabhatta in contrast with
Bhagoj Diksita.. For details see
p.p. 23-24 Vol.VII of the Pata-
jala Mahabhasya ed. D.E. Society,
Poona..
नष्ट elided or dropped a term used
as a synonym of flupta'in some .
commentaries.
नष्टरूपा name given to an anusup
verse which has nine, ten and
eleven syllables respectively for the
first, second and third feet: e.g.
विपृच्छामि पाक्यान् देवान् RV.1.120.4:cf.
R.Pr. XVI. 29. The verse has got
32 syllables, but it has only three
feet instead of four.
नI (1) tad. affix ना as also नाञ् pres-
cribed respectively after ' वि and
नञ् (negative particle न ) in the
sense of separation; e. g. विना,
नाना ; (2) case ending न substituted
for the ins. sing. affix टं (called
also अाइ in ancient grammars) in
the masculine gender after words
called धि i. e. words ending in इ or
उ excepting such as are called नदीं.
नागेशा the most reputed modern
scholar of Panini's grammar, who
was well-versed in other Sastras
also, who lived in Benares in the
latter half of the seventeenth and
the first half of the eighteenth
century. He wrote many master-
ly commentaries known by the
words देखर . and उद्येति on the
authoritative old works in the
different Sastras, the total list of
his small and big works together
well nigh exceeding a hundred.
He was a bright pupil of Hari
Diksita, the grandson of Bhattoj
Diksita. He was a renowned
teacher also, and many of the
famous scholars of grammar in
Benares and outside at present
are his spiritual descendants. He
was a Maharsriya Brahmana of
Tasgaon in Satara District, who
received his education in Benares.
For some years he stayed under
the patronage of Rama, the king
of Sringibera at his time. He was
very clever in leading debates in
the various Sastras and won the

नंज्ञनं
_K
201
नामन
title of Sabhapati. Out of his
numerous works, the Uddyota on
Kaiyata's Mahabhasyapradipa, the
Laghusabdendusekhara om _ the
Siddhanta Kaumud and the Pari-
bhagendusekhara are quite well-
known and studied by every one
who wishes to get proficiency in
Panini's grammar. For details
see pp. 21-24 and 401-403, Vol.
VII of the Patafijala Mahabha-
sya ed. D. E. Society, Poona.
नाज्ञम् see ना.
नाटव् tad. affix नाट applied to the
prefix अव optionally with the
affixes ढीटव् and भ्रटइ: e. g. अवनाटम्
अवटीटम्, अवभ्रटम्: cf Kas. on P. V.
2.31.
नाद् (l) voice; resonance; tone; the
sound caused by the vibration of
the vocal chords in the open
glottis when the air passes through
them; cf. वर्णात्पत्त्यनन्तरभावीं अनुरणनरूपः
इच्द: नादः Uddyota on M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.9; cf. also संवृत कण्ठ य: इाब्दः
क्रियते स नादसंज्ञी भवति T. Pr. II. 4; (2)
sound, articulate sound generally
without sense, which is momen-
tary; (3) the highest sound. See परा.
नादानुप्रदान having voice ( नाद ) as
their main cause: a term used in
connection with vowels and so-
nant consonants which are caused
by नाद: cf. नादः अनुप्रदानं स्वरघोषवत्सु ·
अनुप्रदीयते अनेन वर्णः इति अनुप्रदानं मूळ-
कारणम्, com. on T. Pr. II. 8.
नादि (a root) beginning with न् in
the Dhatup!ha as contrasted with
one beginning with णु ( णादि )
whoseण् is, of course, changed into
न when conjugational and other
forms are arrived at; cf. सर्वे नादयेी
णोपदेशा दृतनान्दनार्दनक्रिनाथिनाधुनाधृनुवर्जम्
M.Bh. on VI. 1.65. =
नादिन् possessed of नद; sonorous,
resonant,TSee नाद!.
26
नानापद् different words as opposed
to समानपद् or a single word:cfVFr-
III. 80; T.P. XKIV. 3, KK. 3.
नान्तरीयक absolutely necessary being,
in a way, inseparable: cf. कश्चि-
दन्नार्थ इळिकळापं सतुवं सपलालमाहृरति
नान्तरीयकत्वात् M. Bh. on P. III.
3.18 on which Kaiyata observes
अन्तरशब्देा विनार्थं " अन्तर भवमन्तरीयम् |
तत्र नछसमास कृते पृषोदरादित्वाद्भाष्यकारवचन-
प्रामाण्याद्वा नलेपाभाव: !
नापुंसक the same as नपुंसुकाळङ्ग or neuter
ईender: cf. नापुसकं भवेत्तास्मिन् " नपुंसके
भूर्व नापुसक्रम् M. Bh. on IV. 1.3.
नाम thc genitive affix आम् together
with the augment न् prefixed to
it: cf. नामि P. VI. 4. 3.
नामज a word or noun derived from
a noun, as opposed to धातुज a word
derived from a root.
नामघातु a denominative root; the
term सुब्धातु is also used for नामघातु:
cf. सुब्धातुर्नीर्मधातुरभिधीयते Nyāsa on P.
VI. 1.3. See the word धातु.
नामन् noun, substantive: one of the
four categories of words given in
the Nirukta and other ancient
grammer works; cf. चत्वारि पदजातानि
नामाख्यत चेोपसर्गनिपाताश्च, Nir. I.1. The
word is defined as सत्त्वप्रधानानि नामानि
by standard grammarians , cf.
Nir. I. 1.: cf also सत्त्वााभधायकं नाम,
R. Pr. XIII.8: V. Pr. VIII. 49
and com. thereon. Panini divides
words into two categories only,
viz. सुबन्त and तिडन्त and includes
नामन् ,उपसर्ग and निपात under सुबन्त.
The Spngrapraksa defines नामन्
as follows-अनपेक्षितशब्दव्युत्पत्तीनि सत्त्व-
भूतार्थाभिधायीनि नामानि | तानि द्विविघानि |
आविष्टलिङ्गानि अनाधिश्छलिङ्गानि च ) The
word नंमिन् at the end of a sasthi-
tatpurusa compound signifies a
name or Sarhji e. g. सर्वनामन्, दिङ्क-
नामन् , छन्देनामन्: cf. also. Bhs-

नामालेङ्गानुशासन
202
निगम
H
vrtti on संज्ञायां कन्थेाीनरषु P. II.4, 20
and संज्ञायां भृतु < P. III. 2.46 where
the author of the work explains
the word संज्ञायां as नाग्नि. The word
is used in the sense of fa collection
of words in the Nirukta, cf अन्त-
रिक्षनामानि, अपत्यनामानि, ईश्वरनामानि,
उदकनामानि, etc.
नामलिङ्गानुशासन a treatise in which
सः words with their genders are given.
The term is usually used in con-
nection with the great dictionary
by अमरसिंहृ which is called नामालिङ्गानु-
दासन or अमरकंीष.
नामिन् (vowels) which cause cere-
bralization; the ten vowels ऋ, ऋ,
ई9 ई, उ, ऊ, ए, ओ, ए, औ; cf. ऋक्रार-
द्ये दइ नामिन: स्वरा: R. Pr. I. 27, cf.
also R.T. 94. See the word नति.
The word भाविन् is used for नाभिन्
in the Vajasaneyi Prtisakhya , cf.
अक्ण्ठघीं भावीं W. Pr. I. 46; cf also
नामिपरो रम् Kat. I.5.12.
नारायण (1) name of a grammarian
who wrote a commentary on the
Mahabhsya-Pradipa; (2) a gram-
marian who is said to have
written a gloss named Sabda-
bhugana on the Stºtras of Panini
as also some minor works named
ढाब्दमञ्जरी, ढाब्दभेदनिरूपण, etc.
नारायणवन्द्य a grammarian of the
seventeenth century who wrote a
treatise on grammar narmed Sara-
vali, and a treatise on roots named
Dhtuprayana.
नव्यवघान necessary intervention: cf.
येन नाव्यवधानं तेन व्यवाहृतेपि वचनप्रामाण्यात्,
a statement which is looked upon )
as a general statement of the '
nature of Paribhasa occurring :
in the Mahabhasya on P. VLI. 2.3.
नाशा elision, the word is used in !
grammar as a synonym of flopa.' !
नासिकास्थान a place in the nose where
a nasal letter such as ङ्क, इ, णु, न्
म् and anuswara get a tinge of
nasalization while passing through
it. The yama letters e.g the nasal
कू, लुट् , ग् घ् get nasalization in the
utterance of the words पलिक्क्निः,
वख्नतुः, अग्मि:, घ्नन्ति; cf. यमेा नाम
वर्णः प्रातिद्वारणाय प्रासद्ध: S.K. on P. VIII.
2. 1. cf. also यमानुस्वारनासिक्यानां नासिके
V. Pr. I. 74, R. T. 12.
नालिक्य letters or phonetic elements
produced in the nose; cf. नासिकायां
यमानुस्वारनासिक्या: R. T. 12. See &
( नासिक्य ).
नि (1) personal ending substituted for
मि (मिप्) of the 1st pers. sing. in the
imperative; (2) a technical term
in the Jainendra Vyakarana for
the term निपात of Panini.
निःलेख्य not possessed of any number-
sense ; the term is used in connec-
tion with indeclinables; cf. अब्यय-
भ्यस्तु नि:संख्येभ्यः सामान्यविंहिताः स्वादयो
वेिद्यन्त एव Kas. on P.I. 4.21.
नि:सेधि deprived of Sarhdhi: without
any euphonic combination or eu-
phonic change.
निक् augment नि as seen in the re-
duplicated syllable कान of the
aorist fºrm कनिक्रदत् of the root क्रन्दू:
cf. क्रन्दछेाड च्लेरङ्कादेशो द्विर्वचनमभ्यासस्ये
बुत्वाभाबी निगागमश्च निपात्यत | अक्रन्ददति
भाषायाम् : Kas. on P.VII.4.65.
नेगम a statement in the Vedic
passage: a Vedic passage; sacred
tradition or Wedic Literature in
general: cf. the frequent expression
इत्यपि निगमे भवति where निगमं means
*a vedic word, given as an
instance'; if also means *Veda': cf.
निगम एव यथा स्यात् / M. Bh. on
VII. 2. 64. Durgacarya says that
the word it also used in the sense
of *meaning';cf. तत्र खळ इत्येतस्य निगमा
भवन्ति Nir. III.9. Durgacārya has
also explained the word as गमवर्ति
मन्त्रार्थान् ज्ञापयन्ति इति निगमt:, those

203 नित्य
निगार
that make the hidden meaning of
the Mantras very clear.
निगार a kind of sound which appa-
दूनाधिका भुरिक् R.Pr.XVII.1.
नित् an affix possessed of the mute
indicatory letter न, the word cha-
rently is made up of a combina-
tion of three phonetic elements
हृ, म् and नासिक्य. It is a peculiar
sound through both the mouth and
the nose, although no specific
place of production is asigned to
it; cf अबिईषस्थानौ सेस्बींदनिगारौ हृकार-
मकारनासेक्या वा निगारे R.T.11.
निघण्द्ध a name given to a collection
of words which are mainly Vedic.
In ancient times such collections
were possibly very general and
numerous and the works or trea-
tises on derivation such as the
Nirukta ofYska were based upon |
them; cf. निघण्टव: कस्मात् | निगमा इम
भवान्ति , छन्दोभ्यः समाहृत्य समाहृत्य समाम्नातास्त
निगन्तव एव सन्तो निगमनान्निघण्टव उच्यन्त
इत्यौपमन्यवः | अपि बा आहृननादव स्युः |
समाहृता भवन्ति | यद्वा समाहृता भवन्ति
(Nir.I.1) where the word is deri-
ved from गम्,or हृन् or हृ. The word
निघण्द्ध is taken as synonymous with
निगम by Durgcrya.
fनघात toning down; the grave accent:
the root निहृन् in its various forms is
used in the sense of toning down
the voice and the word निघात is
used in the sense of the grave
accent (अनुदात्तस्वर) in the Vyakarana |
and Pratisakhya works: cf. also
the words शेषनिघात, सर्वनिघत, etc.: cf.
समानवाक्ये निघातयुष्मदस्मददशाः P. viII.
I.18 Vart. 5.
निङ्ग substitute नि for the last letter of
the word जाया at the end of a
' bahuvrihi compound: cf. युवजानि:, |
* छद्धजान: KS. on P.V. 4.134.
निवृत् lcss by one syllable; the word
is used as an adjective to the
Panne of a Vedic metre which has
89t one syllable less than the
. Pormal cf एकद्वयूनाधिकः सेव वृ-|
racterized by which has the acute
accent on the vowel of the first
syllable: e. g. गाग्र्य:, वात्स्यः, cf Kas.
on P,VI.1.197.
नित्य (I) eternal, as applied to word
or Sabda in contrast with sound
or dhvani which is evanescent
(कायै ). The sound with meaning or
without meaning,made by men and
animals is impermanent; but the
sense or idea awakened in the mind
by the evanescent audible words
on reaching the mind is of a per-
manent or eternal nature; cf. रूफाट:
इाब्दी ध्वनिस्तस्य व्यायामादुपजायते; cf. also
ब्यातिमत्त्वातु देव्दस्य Nir.I.1 ; (2) cons-
tant; not liable to be set aside by
another; cf. उपबन्धस्तु दक्षाय नित्यम् , न
रुन्धे नित्यम् | नित्याव्द्: प्राप्त्यन्तरानषेधेार्थः
T.Pr.I.59, IV.14; (3) original as
constrasted with one introduced
anew such as an augment: cf. T.
Pr. VI.14; (4) permanently func-
tioning, as opposed to tentatively
doing so; cf. नित्यविरते द्विमात्रम् R.
T:37: (5) unchangeable, perma-
nent, imperishable: cf. अयं नित्यज्ञाब्दी-
स्त्येव कूटस्थेष्वविचालिषु भावेषु वर्तते M.Bh.
on P. VIII. 1.4; (6) always or
invariably applying, as opposed
to optional the word in this
sense is used in connection with
rules or operations that do not
optionally apply : cf. उपपदसमासेो
नित्यसमासः, षष्ठीसमासः पुनार्वेभाषा: M. Bh.
on P.II.2.19; (7) constant,as appli-
ed to a rule which applies if
another simultaneously applying
rule were to have taken effect, as
well as when that other rule does
not take effect; cf. कश्चित्कृताकृतप्रसङ्गमा-
त्रेणापि नित्यता Par. Se!. Pari46.
The operations which are nitya
according to this Paribhas take

नित्यबलीयस्त्व 204
निपात
effect in preference to others which
are not *nitya', although they may
even be para': cf. परान्नित्यं बलवत्
Par. Sek. Pari. 42.
नित्यबलीयस्त्च possession of greater
* force; the word is used in connec-
tion with rules that are called निलय.
See नित्य (7).
नित्यसमास
an invariably effective
compound; the term is explained |
as अस्वपदविग्रहे नित्यसमासः i. e. a com-
pound whose dissolution cannot ]
be shown by its component words
as such: e. g. the dissolution of
कुम्भकार: cannot be shown as कुम्मै
कार:, but it must be shown as कुम्मं
करोति स: | The upapadasamsa, the
gatisamsa and the dative tat-
' purusa with the word अर्थ are
' examples of नित्यसमास.
नित्यानन्दपर्वतीय a scholar of Sanskrit
Grammar who wrote glosses on
the Mahabhisyapradipa, on the
Laghusabdendusekhara and on
| the Paribhagendusekhara. He
was a resident of Benares where
he coached mamy pupilsin Sanskrit
Grammar. He Hived in the first
_ halfof the nineteenth century.
निदर्शन illustration; cf. पर्यासो हेकः पुलक:
स्थाल्या निदर्शनाय M.Bh. on I. 4. 23
Vart. I5; cf also इला साल्ह्य चात्र
निदर्शनानि R. Pr. I. 22.
निपात a particle which possesses no
gender and number, and the case
termination after which is dropped
or elided, Nipata is given as one |
* of the four categories of words vi?
< नामन् , आख्यात, उपसर्ग and निपात by ail
the ancient writers of Pratisakhya,
Vyakarana and Nirukta works;cf.
Nir. I. 4, M.Bh. on I. 1. Ahnika
l, R. Pr. XII. 8 etc. The word is
derived from the root पत् with नि
by Yaska who has mentioned three
subdivisions of Niptas उपस्थे,
कर्मापसंग्रहार्थे and पदपूरण; cf. अथ निपात:
उच्चावचेष्वर्थेषु निपतन्ति , अप्युपमार्थे | अपि
कर्मापसंग्रह्यार्थ | अपि पदपूरण:	Nir. I. 4.
The Nipts are looked upon as
possessed of no sense; cf. निपात:
पादपूरणः R. Pr. XII. 8, V. Pr. VIII.
50, ( com. by Uvvata ). Panini has
not given any definition of the
.word निपात, buthe has enumerated
them as forming a class with च at
their head in the rule चादयोSसत्वे
where the word अस्व conveys an
impression that they possess no
sense, the sense being of two
kinds सत्त्व and भाव, and the Nipats
not possesssing any one of the two.
The impression is made rather
firm by the statement of the
Varttikakra-* निपातस्यानर्थकस्य प्राति-
पदिकत्वम् ' P. I. 2. 45 Vart. 12.
Thus, the question whether the
Nipatas possess any sense by them-
selves or not, becomes a difficult
one to be answered. Although the
Rkpratisakhya in KII.8 lays down
that the Nipatas are expletive, still
in the next verse it says that some
of them do possess sense: cf. निपाता-
नामथवैज्ञानिपातनादनर्थकानामतरे च सार्थकंाःon
which Uvvata remarks केचन निपाता:
साथेकाः, केचन निरर्थकाः ' The remark
ofUvvata appears to be a sound
one as based on actual observa-
tion, and the conflicting views have
to be reconciled. This is done by
Bhartrhari who lays down that
Nipatas never directly convey the
sense but they indicate the sense.
Regarding the sense indicated by
the Nipatas, it is said that the sense
is never Sattva or Dravya or sub-
stance as remarked by Panini; it is,
a certain kind of relation and that
too, is not directly expressed by
thern but it is indicated- Bhoja in
his Srngraprakasa gives a very
. comprehensive definition of Nipta

निपातद्योतकत्व
205
निमित्तापायपरिभाषा
as:-जात्यादिप्रवृत्तिनिमित्तानुपग्राहित्वेनासत्त्वभूता-
थभिधायिनः अलिङ्गसंख्याइक्य उच्चावचेष्वर्थेषु
निपतन्तीत्यव्ययधि्ा एब चादयो निपाताः !
He gives six varieties of them, viz.
विध्यर्थ, अर्थवादार्थ, अनुवादार्थ, निषधार्थ,
विधिनिषेधार्थ and अविधिनिषेधार्थ, and
mentions more than a thousand of
them. For details see Bhartpharis
Vakyapadya II. 189-206.
निपातद्योतकत्व the view that the
. nipatas and the upasargas too,
as contrasted with nouns,pronouns
' and other indeclinables, only
, indicate the sense and do not de-
note it; this view, as grammarians
say, was implied in the Mahabh-
sya and was prominently given in
, the Vakyapadya by Bhartphari
which was followed by almost all
later grammarians. See निपात.
निपातन a word given, as it appears,
: without trying for its derivation,in
< authoritative works of ancient gra-
' mmarians especially Panini;cf.दाण्डि-
नायनह्यास्तनयनo P. VI.4.174, as also
, अचतुरविचतुर< V.4.77 etc. etc. The
, phrase निर्घातनात्सिद्धम् is very frequen-
tly used by Patafijali to show that
' some technical difficulties in the
formation of a word are not some-
times to be taken into considera-
tion, the word given by Panini
being the correct one; cf. M.Bh.on
| |.1.#, III.1.22 etc. etc.; cf also
' the usual expression बाधकान्येव निपात-
नानि, The derivation of the word
' f9n पत् with नि causal, is suggest-
* ed in the Rk Pratisakhya where it
is stated that Niptas are laid down
or presented as such in manifold
' senses: cf R. Pr.XII.9: cf also
' घातुसाधनकालानां प्राप्त्यर्थं नियमस्य च |
अनुबन्घविकाराणां रूढघर्थ व निपातनम् M.
Bh Pradipa on P. V.1.114: cf.also
M. Bh. on II.1.27.
निपातनस्वर the.accent, with which the
Nipatana word is expressed in the
Stra, which is said to prevail over
the accent which ordinarily should
be possessed by the word , cf. स
निपातनस्वरः प्रकृतिस्वरस्य बाधको भविष्यति
M.Bh. on P.I.1.56 Vart. 23;"cf.
also M.Bh. on I.3.3, VI.1.123 etc. .
निपातानर्थकत्व the view prominently
expressed by the Warttikakara that
miptas do not possess amy sense,
which was modified by Bharthari
who stated that they do possess
sense which, of course, is indicated
and not expressed. See निपात.
निपाताव्ययोपसगेवृत्ति a short treatise
explaining and illustrating the use
of indeclinables, written by a
grammarian named तिलक who
probably lived in Kasmira.
निमद् a mode of utterance of words at
the performance of a sacrifice.
Seven such modes are given in the
Taittiriya Pratisakhya; cf. उपांशुध्वान-
निमदेंपव्दिमन्मन्द्रमध्यमतारााणT.Pr.XXI1I.
5
निमित्त (1) the formal cause of a gra-
mmatical operation: cf. निमित्तांभावे
नैमिातेकस्याप्यभावः given as a Pari-
bhasa by many grammarians like
Vyadi, Siradeva and others; cf.
also प्रकृत्युपपदोपाधये निमित्तं प्रत्ययेा निामेत
M.Bh. on III.1.1 Vart. 2; (2)
distinguishing sign यः प्रेक्षापूर्वकारी भवति
स: अधुवेण निमित्तेन धुवं निमित्तमुपादत्ते वेदिकां
पुण्डरीकं बा, M.Bh. on I.1.26 Vart.5.
निमित्तसप्तमी locative case, used in the
sense of a cause as prescribed by
निमित्तात्कर्मसंयेोगे, P. II.3 36 Vart. 6
and illustrated by the usually
guoted verseचर्मणि द्वीपिनं हृन्ति दन्तयोर्हन्तं
कुञ्जरम् | कंदाषु चमरी इन्ति सीम्नि पुष्कलकं हृत:
M.Bh.on II.3.36 Vart. 6, also cf.
Ka8. on P. I.1.57.
निमित्तापायपरिभाषा a popular name
given by grammarians to the
. 1्axim निमित्तापाये नैमित्तिकस्याप्यपायः,. a

नमित्तिन्
206
निरनुबन्धक
thing, which is brought into exist>
ence by a cause, disappears on
the disappearance of the cause.
The maxim is not, of course:
universally applicable For details
see Par. Sek. Par. 56, Sira. Pari.
99.
निमित्तिन् an affix or an augment or a
substitute taking place on account
of certain formal causes or nimi*
ttas: cf. निज्ञाताथ निामत्तमनिर्शतार्थे
निमित्ती, इहृ च प्रत्ययेोSनिर्जतः प्रकृत्युपपदे-
पाधयंी निज्ञप्ताः M. Bh. on III. l ¡ l
Vart. 2.
नयत (1)regulated in size or number;
definitely fixed; the word नियत is
used in grammar in connection with
the nimitta or nimittin in a gram>
matical operation prescribed by a
rule, which, or a part of which is
, shown to be superfluous unless
, there is laid down a regulation cf
इषप्रदृगं कर्तव्यम् | शेषनियमार्थम् | प्रकृत्यर्थं
, नियतौ प्रत्यया अनियतास्ते शेषेपि प्राप्नुवन्ति
M.Bh. on I.3.12 Wart. 6; (2) The
. grave accent; cf उदात्तपूर्वं नियतं...
स्वत RPr.III.9.
नियतस्वर (1) an affix whose accent is
definitely given by an indicatory
, mute letter applied to it, cf M.Bh.
, on I.1.3; (2) the grave accent; a
syllable with agrave accent; grave
vowel: cf. नियतस्वरोद्ये R.Pr.XH.25;
(3) name of a Samdhi when a
visarga is changed into रेफ and
then omitted and the preceding
vowel is lengthened; cf दुखस्याकाम-
नियता उभाविमौ R.Pr. IV.9; cf. also
P. VIII.3.14 and VI.3.111.
नियम (1)restriction; regulation: bind-
, ing; the term is very frequently
used by grammarians in connec-
tion with a restriction laid down
with reference to the applica-
tion of a grammatical rule gene-
raly on the strength of that rule,
or a part of it, liable to become
superfiuous if the restriction has
not been laid down; cf. M.Bh. on
I. 1. 3, Kas, on I. 3.63, VI. 4.11;
cf. also the freguently guoted
dictum अनियमे नियमकारिणी परिभाषा: (2)
limitation as contrasted with विकल्प
or कामचार: cf. अनेकप्राप्तावेकस्य नियमी
भवति शेषेष्वानयमः पटुमृदुद्युङ्काः प्रद्युमृदव
इति: M. Bh. on II. 2. 34 Vart. 2;
(3) a regulating rule: a restrictive
rule, corresponding to the Parisarh-
khy statement of the Mimarisakas,
e. g. the rule अनुदात्तङित आत्मनेपदम्
P. I.3.12; the grammarians gene-
rally take a rule as a positive in-
junction avoiding a restrictive sense
as far as possible: cf the dictum
विधिनियमसंभव विधिरव ज्यायान्. Par. Sek.
Pari. 100; the commentators have
given various kinds of restrictions,.
such as प्रयोगनियम,अभिधयनियम,अर्थनियम, '
प्रत्ययनियम, प्रकृतिनियम, संज्ञानियम etc.etc.;
(4) grave accent or anudatta cf.
उदात्तपूर्वं नियतम् R. Pr. III. 9; see
नियत (2).
नियामक limiting; limitative: cf. तु:
क्रियते , स नियामक्री भविष्यति | अमेवेापञ्चम्या:
इति M. Bh, on II. 4.83; cf also
लोके निमित्तं द्विविधं दृढम् | कार्यस्थितौ नियामकं
तदनियामकं च Par. Sek. Pari. 56.
नियोग an obligatory order or
command, such asthat of a pre-
ceptor, as contrasted with स्वभाव;
cfधातोः परः अकारोSक्र्व्दं वा नियेोगत:कतीरं
बुवन्कृत्संज्ञश्च भवति ......... स्वभावतः कर्तारं
बुवन्कृत्संज्ञश्च भवति etc. M. Bh. on F,
III. 4.67 Vart. 8 where Kaiyata
explains नियोग as अाचार्यनियोग.
निरनुनासिक pure, unnasalized, as
opposed to सानुनासेक्र nasalized. cf.
सन्तिं हि यणः सानुनासिका निरनुनासिक्राश्च |
M.Bh. on I. 1. Ahnika 1.
निरनुबन्धक possessed of no mute
iiidicatory letter; not possessed of
any mute indicatory letter f. )

निरनुबन्धकपरिभाषा
पुनरयं (आकारः) सानुबन्धक्र: क निरनुबन्धक:
M.Bh. on I. 1.14. _
निरनुबन्धकपरिभाषा a short term used
for the maxim निरनुबन्धकग्रहणे न
सानुबन्धकस्य ग्रहृणम् Par. Sek. Pari. 81-
निरवकाशा possessed of no scope of, or
occasion for, application; the word
अनवकाङ्क्षा is also used in this sense.
The niravakSa rules always set
aside the general rules which 3re
always present wherever they i. e.
the niravakāsa rules are possible to
be applied. Niravakasatva is looked
upon as one of the two criteria for
बाध or sublation, the other one
being सामान्यविशेषभाव as illustrated
by the usual maxim, known as
तक्रकौण्डिन्यन्याय. See तक्रकौण्डिन्यन्याय: cf.
also अनवकाशा हि विधयो बाधका भवन्ति
Par. Sek. on Pari. 64.
निरखत a fault of pronunciation when
a vowel is harshly pronounced
and hence is not properly audible;
cf निरस्तं निष्ठुरम् Pradipa on M.Bh. I.
I. Ahn. 1. The fault occurs when
the place and the means of utter-
ance are pressed and drawn in;cf.
निरसूतं स्थानकरणापकर्षे R. Pr. XIV. 2.
निराकृत (1) set aside: answered; the
word is frequently used in connec-
tion with faults which are stated
to occur or present themselves if
a particular explanation is given;
(2) prevailed over by another; cf.
तदा न रूपं लभते निराकृतम् R. Pr. XI.
30, where Uvvata paraphrases
निराकृत as विस्मृत. _
निरुक्त name of a class of works which
were composed to explain the
collections of Vedic words by
means of proposing derivations of
those words from roots as would
suit the sense. The Nirukta works
are looked upon as supplementary
to grammar works and there must
have been a good many works of
207 निरुदकादि
this kind in ancient times as
shown by references to the writers
of these wiz. Upamanyu, Sakaty-
ana,Skapt hi,Sakaptirti and others
but, out of them only one work
composed by Yºska has survived;
the word, hence has been applied
by scholars to the Nirukta of
Yनska which is believed to have
been written in the seventh or the
eighth century B. C. i. e. a century
or two before Pahini. The Nirukta
works were looked upon as subsidi-
ary to the study of the Vedas
along with works on phonetics
( शिक्षा ), rituals ( कल्प ), grammar
(याकरण) prosody (छन्दस्र) and astro-
nomy(ज्योतिष)and a mention of them
is found made in the Chandogyo-
panisad. As many of the derivati-
ons in the Nirukta appear to be
forced and fanciful, it is doubtful
whether the Nirukta works could
be called scientific treatises. The
work of Yaska, however, has got
its own importance and place
among works subsidiary to the
Veda, being a very old work of
that kind and quoted by later
commentators. There were some
glosses and commentary works
written upon Yaska's Nirukta out
of which the one by Durgacarya is
a scholarly one.It is doubtful whe-
ther Durgicarya is the same as
Durgasirhha, ' who wrote a Vrtti
or gloss on the Katantra Vyakar-
aha. The word निरुक्त is found in
the Pratisakhya works in the sense
of explainedand not in the sense
of derived; cf R. Pr. XV 6: V.Pr.
IV. 19, 195.
निरुक्तभाष्य a gloss on Yaskas Nirukta
written by a modern scholar of
grammar named Ugracarya in the
eighteemth century A. D.
निरुद्काद्ि a class of compound words

नेरूढलक्षणा
208
headed by the word निरुदक which
have their last vowel accented
acute: e. g निरुदक्रम्, निरुपलम् निर्मक्षिकम्
atc.: cf. Ks. on P. VI. 2. 18.
निरूढलक्षणा potentiality of implica*
ion which gives the meaning of a
word which is based upon implica*
tion: e. g. रथे गच्छत.
निरूढपघ a word, the penultimate
vowel in which is picked up and
taken back, as for instance the
penultimate अ of हृनृ in the word
अहृसु cf. अहृतिश्च अहश्च अहुश्च हृतेर्निरूढोपवा-
द्विपरीतत् Nir. IV. 25.
निर्दिश्यमानपरिभाषा a short formfor the
maxim निर्दिश्यमानस्यादेशा भवन्ति which
means 'substitutes take the place
of that or its part which has been
actually stated or enunciated in
the rule (of grammar)' Par. Fek
Pari. 12. For details see Par. Sek.
, Pari. 12.
निर्दिष्ट exhibited, enunciated: cf
तस्मान्नति निर्दिष्टे पूर्वस्य P.I.1.66; V,Pr.I.
134.
निर्दिष्टपरिभाषा a popular name of the
Paribh∂ तालैमानेति निर्दिष्टे पूर्वस्य cf
किं वेहृ नेिर्दिद्धपरिभाषाप्रवृत्तिर्वचा ， Pari.
Bhaskara Pari. 97.
निर्दशा mention, actual statement; the
word is often used in the Mahabh-
asya in sentences like ख तथा निर्दाः
कर्तव्य:, निदेशं कुरुत etc.; cf also V.Pr.
I. 36: cf. also the maxim तारुमलिति
निर्दिष्टे पूर्वस्य P. I.1.66 and V. Pr. I.
134; cf. also अवइयं क्रयाचिाद्वभक्त्या केन-
चिद्वचनेन निर्देशः कर्तव्यः M.Bh. on P. I.
2. 39 Vrt. I. Sometimes the men-
tion or exhibition made by a word
shows the particular type of word
cf. Durghata Vrtti on P. I. 2. 6
and VII. 4. 73 as also Kas. on
P. IV. 3. 11 and V. 2. 20.
निधोरण (1)selection ofone or some out
of many; cf. जातिगुणाक्रियाभिः समुदायाद-
कददास्य पृथक्करणं निर्धारणम् , मनुष्याणां मृनुष्येषु
वा क्षत्रियः शूरतम: Ks. on P. II.2.10
as also om II.3.4 l ; (2) determined
or definite sense to the exclusion
of another, generally on the
strength of the indeclinable एव
which is expressed or understood,
The word नेिधोरण is used for अवधारण
in this sense: cf. यत एवकारस्ततोन्यत्राव-
धारणम् a maxim used as a Paribhs
by some grammarians cf also
धार्तोस्तानामेतस्यैव l धात्ववधारणं यथा स्यात्तन्नेि-
मित्तावधारणं मा भूदिति Kas. om P. VI.
1.81.
निबद्ध separated,dissociated disconne-
cted:'cf. न निर्वेद्वा उपसर्गा अर्थान्निराहुरिति
इाक्रटायनः Nir. I.3.
निभुज a mame for the Samhitapatha:
Gf निभुजं संहिताध्ययनमुच्यते R. Pr.I. 3.
निर्मलदर्पण name of a commentary on
the Prakriy-Kaumudi.
नर name of a grammarian who is
believed to have written a gloss
( वृात ) on the Stras of Panini on
the strength of a reference to him
in the Nyasa of Jinendrabuddhi;
cf. वृतः पाणिनीयसूत्राणां विवरणं बुछिभद्विनि-
रादिप्रणीतम् Nyāsa on I.1-1-
निर्वेचन interpretation by means of
etymology as found in the Nirukta
works: the act of fully uttering the
meaning hidden in words that are
partially or wholly unintelligible
in respect of their derivation by
separating a word into its compo*
hईht letters cf. निष्कृष्य विगृह्य निर्वचेनम्,
Durgavrtti on Nir. II. 1.For details
see Nirukta II.1.
निर्वेर्तक (1) productive, as opposed to
' expressive: cf. किं पुनरिदं निर्वर्तकम् l
अन्तैरतमा अनेन निर्वेत्यैन्तं , अहोस्वित्रति-
पादकम् | अन्यन निर्वृत्तानामनेन प्रतिपत्तिः ;
M.BB. on P.I.1.50 Vart. 1; (2)
productive of activity: cf सूत्रं
नर्वर्तकं कारकसंज्ञे भवतीति वक्तव्यम् M.
Bh. on I.4.23.
निवेत्र्य one of the many kinds of kar*

निवृत्ति
man or object governed by a
transitive verb or root, which has
got the nature of being produced
or brought into existence grinto ?
new shabe: cf. त्रिविधं कर्म निर्वेत्र्यं विकार्य
प्राप्ये चति का निर्वत्र्यं तावत् कुम्भकार: नगरकार:
The word निर्वेत्ये is explained as
यदसज्जन्यते यद्वा प्रकाश्यते तन्निर्वत्र्यम् | कर्तव्यः
क्रट: 1 उन्डचाथै: इाब्दः Sr. Praksa: cf
also Vakyapadya III.7.78: cf also
इहृ हि तण्डुलानोदनं पचतीति द्व्यर्थः पाचः |
तण्डुलान्पचन्नीदनं निर्वर्तयति | M. Bh. on
I.4.49. For details see the word
कर्मन्: also see M.Bh. on I.4.49.
production of the effect; pro-
duction of the activity by the
agents or insfruments of activity
called Karakas: cf. साधने हि क्रियां
निवेर्तयति तामुपसर्ग विदिानटि M.Bh. on
II. 2.19 Vart. 2.
निईत a fault of pronunciation by
which a letter is uttered harsh or
rude; cf. निहंतो रूक्ष: Kaiyata on M.
Bh.I.1. Ahnika 1 .
निहृींस (1) abridgment, diminution;
cfसर्ववचनं प्रकृतिनिर्हासार्थम् , निर्हस: अपचयः
अल्पत्वमित्यर्थ: | Kaiyata on M.Bh.on
IV.3.100; (2) being turned into a
short (vowel): cf रूपकिन्तस्थाप्रत्ययौ
निर्हसेते R.Pr.IV.39.
निवर्तके lit. expeller, excluding other
forms which are otherwise, that is,
incorrect; cf. समाने वार्थे ज्ञााख्त्रान्वितः
अदाखान्वितस्य निवर्तकं भवति	M.Bh. on
I.I. Siva Stºtra 2.
निवत्यै that which should not proceed
to the next rule; cf. तच्चावश्यं निवस्येम्
M.Bh. on III.2.68, V.1.16, etc.
See the word निवृति.
sometimes used for ानघात or
the grave accent.
निवृत्ति (l) cessation of recurrence of
a word or words from a rule to a
subsequent rule or rules; non-appli-
cation of a rule consequent tipon
the cessation of recurrence or
27
209
_
नंांष्ठत ,
anuvrtti cf: न ज्ञायते केनाभिप्रायेण प्रसजति
क्रन निवृत्तिं करोति M. Bh. on P. 1-1-4*
Vart.8. cf. also एकये गनिर्दिष्टानां सहृ
वा प्रवृत: सहृ बा निवृत्तिः Kt. Par. Vr.
Pari. 9: (2) cessation or removal;
cf. न च संज्ञाया निवृतिरुच्यते | स्वभावतः
संज्ञा संज्ञिनः प्रत्याय्य निवर्तन्त | तन अनु-
बन्धानामपि निवृत्तिर्भविष्यति M. Bh. on
I. 1.1. Vart. 7: cf. also M. Bh. on
I. . 3 etc.; cf. also the usual
word उदात्तनिवृत्तिस्बरः. _
निवृत्तिस्थान places where the sub-
stitutes गुण and वृद्धि do not apply ;
weak terminations; kit or fmit
affixes in Papini's grammar: cf.
अथाप्यस्तर्निवृत्तिस्थानष्वादिलेापी भवति , " स्तः
सन्तीति	Nir. II. 1. The word
संक्रम is also used in this sense by
ancient grammarians.
निषेध negation; prohibition: cf निष-
धपञ्चसूत्रीयं स्वरार्था Bhsvgtti on P.
II. 2.16; cf निषधाश्च बलीयांसः Par.
. Sek. Pari. 112. The word प्रतिषेध
is used frequently in this sense in
old grammar works such as the
Mahabhsya, the word निषध be-
ing comparatively a modern one.
निष्कादि a class of words headed by
the word निष्क to which the affix
इक्र ( ठक् ) is added, provided these
words are not members of a
compound; e. g. नैष्क्रिक्रम् , पादिकम् ,
मात्रिक्रम् etc.: cf. Kas. on P. V.1.20.
निष्क्रष्ट separated; taken out from a
thing: existing only in concep-
tion or idea: cf. इह केचिदुग्राः शब्दन
द्रव्यान्निष्कृष्टा एव प्रत्याय्यन्ते न तु द्रव्यस्ये-
परञ्जक्रत्वेन , यथा चन्दनस्य गन्ध: इति |
Kaiy. on P, II. 2. 8.
निष्ठा the affixes क्त and क्तवत् in
Panini's Grammar: cf. क्तक्तवत् निष्ठा
.P. I. 1.26.
निष्ठित also निःष्ठित completed, accom-
plished; used in connection with
a grammatically formed word by
applying affixes to the bases; cf.

_K 210
नंहत
अङ्गवृत्ते पुनवृत्तावविधिर्निष्ठितस्य Siradeva
Pari. 94, where Siradeva has
explained the word निष्ठित as
प्रयेोगाई-अङ्ग.
निहृत struck down in tone, grave,
possessed of a grave accent; cf.
W. Pr. IV. 138.
निहित separated with the interven-
tion of a consonant. The word is
used in connection with the de-
tached first part of a compound
word not followed immediately
by a vowel; cf. अनहितं अब्यवहृतम्
Uvvata on V. Pr. V. 30.
नीक् augment न affixed to the re-
duplicative syllables of the roots
|ेण्, वञ्च् , खस,ध्र्वम्, भ्रस् कस्, पत्, पद्and
स्कन्द् in the intensive: e. g- अापनी-
फणत्, वनीवच्यत etc. cf. P. VII. 4.65
and 84.
नीच a term used for the grave
accent or for the vowel, accented
grave; cf. स्वरितयोर्मध्ये यत्र नीत्वं स्यात्
T. Pr. XIX. 1. उन्नीवे म नीचमुचात्
R. T. 54, 55 cf, also W. Pr. I. 111.
नीचे:कर् constituting the grave
accent, features of the grave
accent; cf. अन्ववसगे मार्दवमुरुता खस्येति
नीचैःकराणि शब्दस्य M.Bh.on I. 2.30.
नीलकण्ठ author of वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तरहृस्य a
commentary on the Siddhanta
Kaumud of Bhattoj Diksita.
नीलकण्ठदीक्षित a famous grammarian
of the seventeenth century who
wrote an independent work on
the Paribhass in Vyakaraha
named Paribhasavrtti. This Vrtd
is referred to in the Paribhsen-
dusekhara by Nigesabhapa and
the views expressed in'it are
severely criticised in the com. रादी.
नीलकण्ठमाखन् lephew of Appaya
Diksita who has written a on-
mentary on Kaiyata's Mahabha-
Syapradipa.
नुद्
उऋ augment न् (l) affixed to the
words अन्तवैत् and पतिवत् before the
feminine affix डीप् e. g. अन्तर्वत्नी,
पतिवत्नी, cf P. IV. 1.32; (2) affixed
to the root ली before the causa
affix णिच् , e. g. विलीनयति, cf. P.
WII. 3.39; (3) affixed to the rg-
duplicative syllable of roots end-
ing in a nasal consonant and
having the penultimate अ as als6
of the roots जर्, जभू , द , द्, भञ्ज्,
प्, चर्, and फळ in the intensive,
e. g. जङ्गम्यत, तन्तन्यते, यंयमीति, जङ्कमीति,
जञ्जप्यत, दन्दह्यते, दन्दहीति. चञ्चूर्यत, प्रकु
लेीित cf. P. VII 4.85, 86, 87.
उद् augment न् prefixed (l) to the
gen. pl. ending in अाम् after a'crude
base ending in a short vowel, or in
ई or ऊ of feminine bases termed
nadi, or in अा of the feminine affix
( दूष् डाप्_9r चाप्): e g. वृक्षाणाम्,
अज्ञानाम् , क्तूणाम् , कुमारीणाम् , मालानाम्
etc.: cf. P. VII.1.54: (2) to the
affix अाम् after numerals term-
ed षट् and the numeral चतुर् as also
after the words श्री, ग्रामणी and गेो in
, Vedic Literature, e. g. षण्णाम् ,
पृञ्चानाम् .. चतुर्णाम्, श्रीणाम्, ग्रामणीनामु,
गेनाम्: cf. P. VII.1.55,56, 57 (3)
to the part of a root possessed of
two consonants, as also of the
root अझ of the fifth conjugation
after the reduplicative syllable
ending in अा, which is substituted
for अ: e.g. अानञ्ज, व्यानशे: cf. P.VII.4.
71,72; (4) to the affix मतुप् after a
base ending in अन् as also to the
affixes तरप् and तमप् after a base
ending in न् in Vedic Literature,
e.g. मूर्धन्वतीं, अक्षण्वन्त:, सुपथिन्तरः etc.;cf.
P. VIII. 2.16, 17: (5) to the initial
vowel of the second member of a
compound having अ of नन् as the
first member: e. g. अनघ:, cf. P.VI.
3.74; (6) to any vowel after न्
which is preceded by a short vowel

211
सुम
and which is at the end of a word
e.g. कुर्वन्नासेत, cf. P. VIII. 3.32.
नुम augment न् inserted after the last
vowel (1) of a root given in the
Dhatuptha as ending with mute
इ: e.g.'न्दति, क्रन्दति, विन्तयति, जिन्वति
etc.: cf. P VII.1.58; (2).of roots वुच्
and others before the conjugational
sign अ ( दा ): e. g. मुञ्चति, डुम्पति: cf.
P, VII.1.59: (3) of the roots मस्जु,
नन्, रध्, जभ् and लभ् under certain
specified conditions, e.g.मड्क्त्वा, नेटा,
, रन्धयति, जम्भयति, लम्भयति, आलम्भ्य: etc.
cf. P.VII. 1.60-69; (4) of declin-
able bases marked with the mute
indicatory letter उ, ऋ or ल as also
of the declinable wording अञ्च्
from the root अञ्च् and युज्, e.g.भबान्,
श्रयान् , प्राङ्क, युङ्क, cf. Kas. on P. VII.1.
70, 71: (5) of the declinable base
in the neuter gender, ending with
a vowel or with any consonant
excepting a semivowel or a nasal,
before a case-ending termed Sar-
vanamasthana; e.g. यद्दांसि, वनानि,
जतून etc., cf. Kas. on VII.1.72: (6)
of the declinable base in the neuter
gender, ending with इ, उ,ऋ or ल
before a case-ending beginning
with a vowel: e.g. मधुन, बुचिने etc.,
cf Kaई, on P. VII.1.73: (7) of the
affix इततृ ( अत् of the pres. part.)
under certain conditions थातो यान्ती;
पचन्तो, सीब्य्न्ती, cf. ! .VII.78-8 : (8)
of the word अनडुहृ before the nom.
and voc. sing. affix सु:e.g. अनड्वान् ,
हे अनड्वन्, cf. P. VII.i. 82: (9) 6f
the words दृक्, स्ववस् and स्वतवसु
before the nom. and voc.sing.affix
ठ in Vedic Literature, e. g. यादृङ्क,
स्ववान् , स्वतवान् , cf. P.VII.1.83.
उमागम augment न् inserted after the
' last vowel ofa root or a noun-base
in specified cases. See नुम्.
ऋच्व-ं name of the second Yama
' letter, _ _
नेमस्पृष्ट partly touched, half touched ;
semicontacted; a term used for
sibilants and hissing sounds-
नेकाच् multisyllabic,possessed ofmany
syllables, as contrasted with प्रौं
नैगम(1) belonging to the Veda,Vedig
as opposed toलौकिक or भाषिर्क 9
नेघण्टुकैर्नान नैगमानीहृह्य Nir.I. 20: (2)
name given to Kimdas 4, 5 and ?
of the Nirukta ofYaska; cf. अनवृगत-
संस्कारा जहृादयो यस्मिन्निगम्यन्ते तलैगमं
Durga Vr. on Nir IV.1.
नैघण्टुक mentioned as secondary lit-
निर्धण्ट्रकाण्ड बर्तमानानि पदानि; the term is
applied to the first three Kandas
or sections of the Nirukta..
नेपातिक accessory accidental; निपातात्
अागतानि.
नेमन्तिक effect: one that is caused cf.
निमित्ताभावे नैमित्तिकस्याप्यभाव: a Pari-
bhs given by Vyadi, Siradeva
and others.
नेरुक्त (1) obtained by derivation, ety-
mological; (2) etymologist, writer
ofa Nirukta work.
नेदंज्ञिक matter of communication;
statement made for communica-
tion. Uddyota explains the word
as निर्दढाः बोधः प्रयेौजनेमस्य नैर्द्कि: । cf.
एत खञ्वपि नैर्दर्श्ािकानां वार्ततरका भवन्ति य
सर्वनाम्ना निर्दइा: क्रियन्त M. Bh. on
P. I.1.67.
नेवासिक tad. affixes अण् and others
added in the sense of * तस्य निवासः '
(P. IV. 2. 69), as in words like ;ंब
meaning the place of residence of
the Sibis.
न्यक् a technical term in the Jainen-
dra Vyakarana for the term उपसर्जन
defined by Panini in the rules
प्रथमानिर्दिष्टं समास उपसर्जनम् and एक-
विभाक्ति चा पूर्वानपाते P.I.2.43, 44.
न्यङ्गकुसारिणी a kind of बृहृती metre in
which the second foot has twelve
syllables, while the rest have

न्यङ्गकादि
eight syllables each;
न्यङ्कुसारिणी R.Pr.XVI.32.
न्यङ्काद्ि a class of words headed by
the word न्यङ्कु, which are formed
by means of the substitution of a
guttural consonant in the place of
a consonant of any other class
belonging to the root from which
these words are formed; e. g. न्यङ्कुः
मद्गुः, भृगुः etc.: cf. Kas, on P.VII.3.
53.
न्यच् going lower, subordinate, the
word is used in the sense of upa-
sarjana as a technical term in the
Jainendra Vyakaraa, cf. वोक्तं न्यक्
Jain. Vy.I.1.93.
न्यवश्रदृ also नीवावग्रहृ, the vowel at the
अर्वाग्रहृ or end of the first rnember
of a compound word which has
got a grave accent: e. g. the vowel
ऊ of नृ in तनूनप्त्र: cf. उदीद्यन्ती न्यवग्रहृ-
स्तथाभाब्य: V. Pr. I. 120. See ताथा-
भव्य!. _
न्यस्त name given to अनुदात्त or the
grave tone cf मात्रा न्यस्ततरेकेषामुभे
ब्यfळि: समस्चरे R. Pr. III. 17 whee
Uvvata explains न्यस्ततरा as अनुदात्ततरा.
न्याय maxim, a familiar or patent
instance quoted to explain simi-
lar cases; cf the words अथिीकरवाणि-
न्याय M. Bh. on P. II 2.24, अपवाद-
न्याय M. Bh. on P. I. 8. 9, अावर्व-
कुन्याय् M. Bh. on P. IV. 1. 88, 89,
IV. 2.60, IV.3.131, V. 1.7, 28, VI
2. 11 ; कुम्भीधान्यन्याय M.Bh. on P. .
3-7, कूपखानक्रन्याय M.Bh. I. 1. Ahnka
1, दण्डिन्याय M.Bh. on P. VIII.2.83,
नष्टाश्वदग्धरथन्याय M. Bh. on P. I.1.50
प्रधानाप्रधानन्यायM.Bh.on P.II.1.69,VI.
8. 82, प्रासादवासिन्याय M. Bh. on P. .
1.8,मांसुर्कण्टकन्यायM.Bh. on P.I.2.39,
लट्वानुकर्षणन्याय M.Bh. on Siva Sतु
2 Vart. 5, दालिपलालन्याय M.Bh on P.
1.2.39,सूत्रदाटकन्याय M.Bh. on P. I.3.
12, The word came to be used
, in the general sense of Paribhas
cf. द्वितीय
212
न्याय्य
or rules of interpretation many of
which were based upon popular
maxims as stated in the word
लेीकन्यायसिद्ध by Nagesa. Hemacan-
dra has used the word न्याय for
Paribhs्-vacana.The word is also
used in the sense of a general rule
which . has got some exceptions,
cf न्यायैर्मिश्रानपवादान् प्रतीयात् R. Pr.
which lays down the direction
that fone should interpret the rule
laying down an exception along
with the general rule'.
न्यायरत्नमञ्जूषा a work dealing with
Vyakarana Paribhass or maxims
as found in Hemacandra's system
of grammar, written bv Hema-
hatiasaganin, a pupil of Ratna-
. sekhara, in 145 1. The author has
written a commentary also on the
work, named Nyasa.
न्यायसंग्रह a work enumerating the
Paribhss in Hemacandra's gram-
mar, numbering 140 nyayas out
of which 57 nyayas are said to
have been given by Hemacandra
himself at the,end of his comment
वृहृद्वृति on his Sabdanussana. The
work is written by महंसगणि who
has added a commentary to it
called Nyayarthamanjusa by him,
which is also known by the name
न्यायरत्नमञ्जूषा which see above.
न्यायसंहित combined euphonically ac-
cording to rules of grammar cf.
तद्वति ताद्धते न्यायसंहृितं चत्explained as
ब्याकरणशास्त्रोक्तसंधमत् V. Pr.'V. 8 com.
न्याया3द्ध established by a maxim;with
full justification : cf. न्यायासद्धमेवैतंत् M.
Bh.on W.1.19.The word is used as
opposed to ज्ञापकासेद्व by Nagesa: cf.
Par. Sek. Pari. 1.
न्यायार्थमञ्जूषा a name given to न्याय-
रत्नमञ्जूषा. See न्यायरत्नमञ्जूषा.
न्याय proper; fully justified न्यायादन-
पेतर्cf PIV.4.92: correct: regular;

न्यास
213 पक्ष
cf यञ्ज्भ्यामुक्तत्वादर्थस्य न्याय्योत्पत्तिर्न भवि-
ष्यति M. Bh. on II.3.1 where Kai-
yata however, explains the word
differently. Kaiyata states that
न्याय्य means a general rulex cf.उत्सर्गः
पूर्वाचार्यप्रसिद्धया न्याय्य उच्यते Kaiyata on
P, II. 3.1. By Prvacrya he pos-
sibly refers to the writers of the
Pratisakhyas and other similar
works by ancient grammarians,
where the word nyya is used in
the sense of * a general rule '. See
the word न्याय above.
न्यास (1) lit. position, placing:a word
used in the sense of actual ex-
pression or wording especially in
the sitras; cf the usual expression
क्रियत एतन्न्यास एव in the Mahabhasya,
cf M. Bh. on I. 1.11, 1.1.47 etc.:
(2) a name given by the writers
or readers to works of the type of
learned and scholarly comme-
ntaries on vritti-type:works on
standard stitras in a Sastra: e. g.
the mame Nyasa is given to the
learned commentaries on the
Vrtti on Hemacandra's Sabda-
nusasana as also on the Pari-
bhasvrtti by Hemaharhsagani.
Similarly the commentary by
Devanandin on Jainendra gram-
mar and that by Prabhācandra on
the Amoghavrtti on Sakarayana
grammar are named Nyāsa. In
the same way, the learned com-
mentary on the Ksikavrtti by
Jinendrabuddhi, named Ksi-
kavivaranapafijika by the author, is
very widely known by the mame
Nyasa. This commentary Nyasa
'was written in the eighth century by
the Buddhist grammarian Jinen-
drabuddhi, who belonged to the
easternschool ofPanini's Grammar.
This Nyasa has a learned co-
mmentary written on it by
Maitreya Raksita in the twelfth
century named Tantrapradipa
which is very largely quoted by
subsequent grammarians, but
which unfortunately is available
only in a fragmentary state at
present. Haradatta, a well-known
southern scholar of grammar has
drawn considerably from Nyasa
in his Padamafijari, which also is
well-known as a scholarly work.
न्यासीद्योत a learned commentary on
Jinendrabuddhi's Nyasa written
by Mallinatha, the standard com-
mentator of prominent Sanskrit
classics.
न्यून incomplete in sense or wording
as opposed to Prna; cf. अयवावे ग्य्ने
( पादं ने संनिकृष्येते ) R. T. 76.
प
प् (l) first consonant of the labial
class of consonants possessed of
the properties श्वासानुप्रदान, अचेष, and
कण्ठविवृतत्व; ( 2 ) प् applied as a
mute letter to a suffix, making
the suffix accented grave (अनुदात्त).
प, पकार the consonant प्, the vowel
अ and the affix कर being added
for facility of understanding and
pronunciation; cf T.Pr. I. 17, 21 ;
प is also used as a short term for
consonants of the fifth class (पवर्ग):
cf. T. Pr. 1.27: V. Pr. I. 64 and
R. T. 13.
पक्ष alternative view or explanation
presented by, or on behalf of, a
party ; one of the two on more
way of presenting a matter. The
usual terms for the two views are
पूर्वपक्ष and उत्तरपक्ष, when the views
are in conflict. The views, if
not in conflict, and ifstated as
alternative views, can be many
in number, e. g. there are seven *
alternative views or Paksas re ;

पक्षादिं
214
पणि्डत
the interpretation of the rule इकं
गुणवृद्धी: cf. M. Bh. 9n P. I. 1.3: cf
als6 सर्वेषु पक्षेषु उपसंख्यानं कतैब्यम् M.
Bh. on P. I. 2.64.
पक्षादि a class of words headed by
the word पक्ष to which the tad-
dhita affix अायन ( क् ) causing
vrddhi is added in the four senses
given in P. IV. 2.67-70: e. 8.
पाक्षायण:, अाद्मायनः etc.: cf KS. on
P. IV. 2.80.
पचादि a class of roots headed by the
root पच् to which the krt. affix अ
( अव् ) is added in the sense of
*anagemt': e. g. श्वपच:, चेीर:, देव:
etc, The class पचादि is described
as अाकृतिगण and it is usual with
commentators to make a remark
पचाद्यच् when a krt affix अ is seen
after a root without causing the
vrddhi substitute to the preced-
ing vowel or to the penultimate
vowel अ. cf. अज्विधिः सर्वधातुभ्यः पठ्यन्त
च पचादय:	अण्बाधनार्थमेवे स्यात् सिध्यन्ति
श्वपचादघ: Ka8. on P. III. 1.134.
पञ्चपदी a term used in the Atharva-
Prtisºkhya for the strong case
affixes viz. the nominative case
affixes and the accusative sing.
and dual affixes; cf. श्वत्वारि चैप्रञ्व
पत्रन्वपद्यामन्तोदात्तादीनि यत् A. Pr. I.
3.14, The term corresponds to
the Sarvanamasthana of Panini,
which is also termed सुट् ; cf. सुडन-
पुसकस्य P. I. 1.43.
पञ्चम the fifth consonant of the five
classes of consonants; the nasal
consonant, called also वर्गपचम: cf.
यथा तृतीयास्तथा पञ्चमा आनुनासिक्यत्रर्जम् M.
Bh. on P. I. 1.9 Vart. 2.
पव्वमी (1) the fifth case;ending of the
fifth or ablative case as prescrib-
ed by rules of Panini cf. अपादन
* पञ्चमी, P. II. 3-7, 10, etc. (2) the
imperative mood: cf. Kºt.III.1.18.
पंञ्चमीनिर्दा statement by the abla-
tive case, cf.. डः सि धुट् P. VIII.
3.29: cf उभयनिर्देशे पञ्चमीनिर्दलैः बलीयान्
e. g. डमे हृखादचि डमुण्नित्यम् P. VIII.
3.32, Par. Sek. Pari. 70; cf also
उभयानिर्दशे विप्रतिषेधात्पञ्चमीनिर्द्: M. Bh.
on P. . 1.67 Vart. 3.
पञ्चाळपद्वृत्ति the usage or the me-
thod of the Paficlas; the eastern
method of euphonic combinations,
viz. the retention of the vowel अ
after the preceding vowel ओ
which is substituted for the
Visarga; e. g. वेी अमै: cf R. Pr.
II. 12: T. Pr. XI. 19. This
vowel अ which is retained, is pro-
nounced like a short ओ or अर्ध-
ओीकार by the followers of the
Satyamugri and Rayaniya bran-
ches of the Samavedins; cf com-
mentary on T. Pr. KI. 19 as also
M. Bh. Ahnika 1.
पञ्जिका a popular name given to
critical commentaries by Scholars;
cf, काशिकाविवरणपञ्जिका by Jinendra-
buddhi which is popularly known
by the name न्यास.
पटच् tad. affix पट in the sense of
extent ( विस्तार ) added to the word
अवि: e. g. अविपटम् cf. विस्तार पटज्वक्तव्यः.
P. V. 2.29 Vart. 2.
पठन oral recital, the word is used
in connection with the use of
words by the author himself in
his text which he is supposed to
have handed over orally to his
disciples, as was the case with
the ancient Vedic and Sutra
works: cf the words पठित, पठिष्यते,
पछयत and the like, frequently used
in the Mahabhsya in connection
with the mention of words in the
Stras of Panini.
पण्डित writer of Citprabh, a com-
mentary on the Paribhsendu-
sekhara. A commentary on the
♥ ♥ Laghusabdendusekhara is also as*

पतञ्जाळ
215
पतञ्जलि
cribed to him. He was a Gauda
Brahmana whose native place was
Kuruksetra. He lived in the
beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury.
पतञ्जाळ the reputed author of the
Mahabhasya, known as the Patafij-
ala Mahabhasya after him. His
date is determined definitely as the
second century B.C. on the streng-
th of the internal evidence suppli-
ed by the text of the Mahabhsya
itself The words Gonardiya and
Gonikputra which are found in
the Mahabhasya are believed to
be referring to the author himself
and, on their strength he is said
to have been the son of Gonik
and a resident of the country
called Gonarda in his days.
On the strength of the internal
evidence supplied by the Maha-
bhasya, it can be said that
Pata jali received his education at
Taksasila and that he was,just like
Panini, very familiar with villages
and towns in and near Wahika and
Gandhara countries. Nothing can
definitely be said about his birth-
place, and although it might be
believed that his native place was
Gonarda,its exact situation has not
been defined so far. About his
parentage too,no definite informa-
tion is available. Tradition says
that he was the foster-son of a
childless woman named Gonik to
whom he was handed over by a
sage of Gonarda, in whose hands
he fell down from the sky in the
evening at the time of the offering
of water-handfuls to the Sun in
the west; cf.पतत् + अञ्जलि, the deriva-
tion of the word given by the
commentators. Apart from an-
ecdotes and legendary informa-
tion, it can be said with certain-
ty that Patafijali was a thorough
scholar of Sanskrit Grammar
who had studied the available
texts of the Vedic Literature and
Grammar and availed himself of
information gathered personally
by visiting the various schools of
Sanskrit Grammar and observing
the methods of explanations given
by teachers there. His Mahabh∂-
sya supplies an invaluable fund of
information on the ways in which
the Grammar rules of Panini were
explained in those days in the
various grammar schools. This in-
formation is supplied by him in
the Varttikas which he has
exhaustively given and explained.
He had a remarkable mastery
over Sanskrit Language which
was a spokem one at his time and
it can be safely said that in res-
pect of style, the Mahbhsya
excels all the other Bhsyas in the
different branches of learning out
of which two, those of Sabarasw-
min and Sankaracārya,are selected
for comparison. It is believed by
scholars that he was equally conv-
ersant with other Sastras, especi-
ally Yoga and Vaidyaka, on which
he has written learned treatises.
He is said to be the author of the
Yogasitras which,hence are called
Pºtafijala Yogastras, and the
redactor of the Carakasafahita.
There are scholars who believe
that he wrote the Mahabhasya
only, and not the other two. They
base their argument mainly on the
supposition that it is impossible
for a scholar to have an edually
unmatching mastery over three
different Sastras at a time. The
argument has no strength, especi-
ally in India.where there are many
instances of scholars possessing

पद
________
sound scholarship in different
branches of learning Apart from
legends and statements of 9akrad-
hara, Ngesa and others, about his
being the author of three works
on three different sastras, there is
a direct reference to Patafijalis
proficiency in Grammar .98a ]
and Medicine in the work of King
Bhoja of the eleventh century
andan indirect one in the Wikya-
padya of Bharthari_of the
eventh century A. D. There is a
work on the life of Pataiali,
written by a scholar of grammar
of the South,named Ramabhadra
which gives many stories and inc-
dents of his life out of which it is
difficult to find out the grains of
true incidents from the legendary
husk with which they are covered.
For details,seePataijala Mahabha-
sya D.B.Society's edition Vol.IVJI
pages 849 to 374, See alsothe
word महाभाष्य,
पद a word: a unit forming a part
of a sentence: a umit made up ofa
letter or of letters, possessed of
sense: cf. अक्षरसमुदायः पदम् ， अक्षरं वा !
V.Pr. VIII. 46, 47. The word
originally was applied to the indi-
vidual words which constituted the
Vedic Sarhhit; cf पदप्रकृतिः संहिता
Nir.I.17. Accordingly, it is defin-
ed in the Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya
as * अर्थः पदम ' (V. Pr. III. 2) as
contrasted with * वर्णानामेकप्राणयोगः
संहिता ' (V.Pr.I.158). The definition
* अर्थः पदम् " is attributed to the
ancient grammarian Indra', who
is believed to have been the first
Grammarian of India. Panini has
defined the term पद as * सुतिडन्ते
पदम् ' P.I.4.14. His definition is
applicable to complete noun-forms
and verb-forms and also to prefixes
aud indeclinables where a case-
216
_____ पद्
affix is placed and elided accord-
ing to him: cf. अव्ययादाप्सुप: P. II. 4.
82, The noun-bases before case
affixes and tad. affixes, mentioned
in rules upto the end of the fifth
adhyaya, which begin with a con-
sonant excepting य् are also termed
पद by Panini to include parts of
words before the case affixes भ्याम् ,
भिक्, सु etc. as also before the tad.
affixes मत्, वत् etc. which are given
as separate padas many times in the
pada-patha of the Vedas; cf स्वादि-
ईवसर्वनामेस्थान P. I. 4. 17. See for
details the word पदपाठ. There are
given four kinds of padas.or words
रेiz. नाम, अाख्यात, उपसर्ग and निपात in
the Nirukta and Pratisakhya works;
cf. also पदमर्थं प्रयुज्यते, विभक्त्यन्तं च पदम्
M. Bh. on P. I. 2, 64 Wart. 19,
वर्णसमुदायः पदम् M.Bh. on I.1.21 Vart.
5, पूर्वपरयोरथींपलंब्धौ पदम् Kat. I.1.20,
पदंशंदनाथे उच्यते Kaiyata on P.I.2.42
Vart. 2: cf. also पद्यते गम्यते अर्थः
अनेनति पदमित्यन्वर्थसंज्ञा Nyasa on P.III.
1.92. The verb endings or affixs ति,
तस् and others are also called
पद. The word पद in this sense
is never used alone, but with
the word परमै or अात्मन preceding
it. The term परमैपद stands for
the nine affixes तिप्, तट्, ...मर्,while
the term आत्मनपद stands for the
nine affixes त, आताम् ... माइड्, cf ल:
परमैपदम्, तडानावात्मनेपदम् It is possible
to say that in the terms परस्मैपद
and अात्मनपद ， also, the term पद
could be taken to mean a
word, and it is very likely that
the words : परस्मैपद ' and अात्मनपद
were originally used in the sense
of *words referring to something
meant for another and refer-
ring to something meant for
self * respectively. Such words,
of course, referred to verbal forms,
roughly corresponding to the

पदकाण्ड
217
पदचन्द्रिका
पद्काण्ड (i) a term used in connection
verbs in the active voice and
verbs in the passive voice. There
are some modern scholars of gra-
mmar, especially linguists, who
Iike to translate परस्मैपद as factive
voice and आत्मनेपद as * passive
voice'. Paini appears, however,
to have adapted the sense of the
terms परस्मैपद and आत्मनेपद and taken
` them to mean mere affixes just as
he has done in the case of the
terms इत् and तद्धित. Presumably in
ancient times, words current in
use were grouped into four classes
by the authors of the Nirukta
works, viz. (a) कृत् (words derived
from roots)such as कर्त, कारकः, भवनम्
etc., (b) तद्वित (words derived from
मnouns ) such as गाग्र्य:, काषायम् , etc.,
(c) Parasmaipada words viz. verbs
such as भवति, पचति, and (d) Atma-
nepada words i.e. verbs like एधते,
वर्धते, etc.Verbs करोति and कुरुते or हृरतिं
and दृरते were looked upon as both
परमैपद words and आत्मनेपद words.
The question of simple words, as
they are called by the followers of
Panini, such as नर, तद् , गे, अश्व, and
a number of similar underived
words, did not occur to the authors
of the Nirukta as they believed
that every noun was derivable,
and hence could be included in
the krt words.
with the first section of the Vakya-
padya narmed ब्रह्मकाण्ड also, which
deals with padas, as contrast-
ed with the second section
which deals with Vakyas; (2)
a section of the Astadhyay of
Panini, which gives rules about
changes and modifications applic-
able to the pada, or the formed
word, as contrasted with the base
(अङ्ग) and the suffixes. The section
is called पदाधिकार which begins with
28
the rule पदस्य P.VIII.1.16. and ends
with the rule इडाया चा VIII. 3. 54.
पद्कार 1it. one who has divided the
Sarhhit text of the Wedas into the
Pada-text. The term is applied to
ancient Vedic Scholars ढाक्रव्य, अत्रय,
कात्यायन and others who wrote the
Padaptha of the Vedic Samhits.
The term is applied possibly
through misunderstanding by some
scholars to the Mahabhasyakara
who has not divided any Wedic Sarh-
hit,but has, in fact, pointed out
a few errors of the Padakras
and stated categorically that gra-
mmarians need notfollow the Pada-
pipha, but, rather, the writers of
the Padapagha should have follow-
ed the rules of grammar. Pata-
jali, in fact, refers by the term
पदक्रार to Katyyana, who wrote
the Padapatha and the Pratisakhya
of the Vajasaneyi-Sarhhita in the
following statement--न लक्षणेन पदकारा
अनुवत्र्याःपर्दक्रैनीम लक्षणमनुवत्र्यम् यथालक्षणं
पदं कर्तव्यम् M. Bh. on P. III.1. 109;
VI. 1. 207: VIII. 2.16; cf. also
अदीधयुरिति पदकारस्य प्रत्याख्यानपक्ष उदाहृ-
रणमुपपन्नं भवति ( परिभाषासूवन of व्याड
Pari. 42 ) where Vydi clearly
refers to the Vartika of Katya-
yana * दीधीवब्येाश्छन्दोविषयत्वात् ， *
P. I. 1.6 Vव्रrt. I. The misunder-,
standing is due to passages in the
commentary of स्कन्दस्वामिन् om
the Nirukta passage I. 3, उब्बट-
टीका on ऋक्प्रातिशाख्य XIII. 19
and others where the statements
referred to as those ofPatajali are,
in fact, quotations from the Pr्-
tisakhya works and it is the writers
of the Pratisakhya works who are
referred to as padakras by Pata्-
jali in the Mahabhasya. L*
पद्चन्द्रिका a grammar work on the
nature of words written by कृष्ण，ीष
of the sixteenth century. _

पद्पक्ष 218 पदविध
पद्पक्ष the same as पदसंस्कारपक्ष. See and the Benares School of Gram-
* _-
पदलैरुक्रारपक्ष.
पद्पाठ the recital of the Veda text
pronouncing or Showing each
word separately as detachcdfrof!
the adj6ining word. It is believed
that the Veda texts were recited
originally as running texts.by the
inspired sages, and as such they
wefe preserved by people by oral
tradition. Later on after several
centuries, their individually dis-
tinct words were shown by gram-
marians who were called Pada-
kras. The पदपाठ later on had
many modifications or artificial
recitations such as क्रम, जटा, घन etc.
in which each word was repeated
twice or more times, being uttered
connectedly with the preceding
or the following word, or with
both. These artificial recitations
were of eight kinds, which came
to be known by the term अटविकृतयः.
एद्प्रक्रति a term used in connection
with the Sarhhit text or संहितापाठ
which is believed to have been
based upor words ( पदानि प्रकृति:
यस्याः सा ) or which forms the basis
of words or word-text or the pada-
pagha (पदानां प्रकृतिः); cf पदप्रकृतिः संाहृता
Nir.I.17.
पद्मभेद् lit, divisions of words: parts
of speech. There are four parts of
speech viz.नामन् , आख्यात, उपसर्ग and
निपात given by ancient gramma-
rians and the authors of the
Pratisakhya works, while there are
given only two, सुबन्त and तिडन्त by
Panini. For details see pp. 145,
146 Vol. VII. Mahabhsya D. E.
Society's edition.
पद्मञ्जरी the learned commentary by
Haradatta on the काशिकावृति. Hara-
datta was a very learned gram-
marian of the Southern School,
marians follow पदमञ्जरी more than
the equally learned another com-
mentary क्रादिक्राधिबरणपञ्जिक्रा or न्यास.
In the Padamanjar Haradatta is
said to have given everything
of importance from the Mah-
bhasya : cf. अधीत हृि मह्याभाष्य व्यर्था सा
पदमञ्जरी. For details see Mahabhasya
D. E, S. Ed. Vol. VII P. 390-391.
पदवाक्यरत्नाकर a discuisition on
grammar dealing with the differ-
ent ways in which the sense of
words is conveyed. The work
consists of a running commentary
on his own verses by the author
Gokulantha Misra who, from
internal evidence, appears to have
flourished before Kondabhatta and
after Kaiyata.
पद्वद् or पद्वादिपक्ष view that words
are real and have an existence
and individuality of their own.
The view is advocated by the
followers of both the Mimrhs
schools and the logicians who
believe that words have a real
existence. Grammarians admit the
view for practical purposes, while
they advocate that the अखण्डवाक्य-
स्फीट alone is the real sense. cf.
Vakyapadya II.90 and the foll.
पद्विधि an operation prescribed in
connection with words ending
with case or verbal affixes and not
in connection with noun-bases or
root-bases or with single letters or
syllables. पदविधि is in this way con-
trasted with अङ्गाविंधि ( including
प्रातपादेकविधि and धातुवेध ), वर्णविधि and
अक्षरावाध, Such Padavidhis are given
in Phini's grammar in Adhyaya2,
Padas l and 2 as also in VI.1.158,
and in VIII. 1.16 to VIII.3.54 and
include rules in connection with
compounds, accents and euphonic

पदविराम
219
पदान्त
combinations. When, however, an |
operation is prescribed for two or |
more padas, it is necessary that |
the two padas or words must be ;
syntactically connectible; cf. समथे: !
पदविधि: P. II.1.1. -
पदविराम pause between two words
measuring two matrs, or equal to
the time required for the utter-
ance of a long vowel; e. g. in इषं
त्वोजे त्वा, the pause between इषे and
त्वा is measured by two matras; cf.
पदवरामो द्विमात्रः T. Pr. XXII.13.Some
Pratisakhya texts declare that the
pause between two words is of !
one matra as at avagraha cf. R
Pr. II.1 and R. T. 35-38.
पदव्यवस्थास्त्रकारिका a metrical work
on the determination of the
pada or padas of the roofs attri-
buted to Vimalakirti. I
पद्व्यवस्थास्त्रकारिकाटीका a short gloss
on the पदव्यवस्थास्त्रकारिकां written by
Udayakirti, a Jain grammarian
पद्संस्कारपक्ष an alternative view with
वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष regarding the forma-
tion of words by the application
of affixes to crude bases. Ac-
cording to the Padasarhskra al-
ternative, every word is formed
independently, and after forma-
tion the words are syntactically
connected and used in a sentence.
The sense of the sentence too, is
understood after the sense 6f every
word has been understood; cf.
सुविचार्य पदस्यार्थं वाक्ये ग्रह्णन्ति सूरयः Sira.
on Pari. 22. According to the
other alternative viz. वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष,
a whole sentence is brought before
the mind and then the constitu-
ent individual words are formed
e.g. राम +सु, गम् + अ + ति | Both the
views have got some advantages
and some defects; cf Par. Sek.
Pari. 56.
पद्|्फोट expression of the sense by
the whole word without any con-
sideration shown to its division
into a base and an affix. For inst-
ance, the word रामेण means " by
Rama irrespective of any consider-
ation whether न is the affix or इन
is the affix which could be any
of the two, or even one, different
from the two: cf. उपायाः शिक्षमाणानां
वाळानामपलापना: Vakyapadya II.240.
पदादि (1) beginning of a word, the
first letterof a word: cf. सात्पदाद्योः
P. VIII.3.11 1: cf. also रघरितो वानुदत्त
पददंी P. VIII.2.6. Patanjali, for the
sake of argument has only once ex-
plained पदादि as पदादादिः.cf. M.Bh.on
f. 1. 63 Vrt. 6: (2) a class of words
headed by the word पद् which is
substituted for पद् in all cases ek-
cept the nom. and the acc sin
gular and dual this class, called
पदादि, contains the substitutes पद् ?
द्त्, नस् etc. respectively for gाद
द्न्र्त, नासिका etc. cf. Ks on P. VI.
1.63: (3) the words in the class,
called पदादि, constiting of the
words पद्, दत्, नट्, मस् हृत् and निन्छे
only, which have the case affix
after them accented acute: cf P.
VI. 1.171.
पद्!दिविधि a grammatical operation
specifically prescribed for the ini-
tial letter of a word.
पद्ााधकार the topic concerning padas
i.e. words which are regularly
formed, as contrasted with words
in formation. Several grammatical
operations, such as accents or
euphonic combinations, are speci-
fically prescribed together by
Panini at places which are said
to be in the Padadhikara formed
by stras VIII.1.16 to VIII.3.54.
पद्ान्त final letter of a word; cf. P.
VI.1.76, 109; VII.3.3, 9; VIII,

पदार्थ
220
परंकार्यत्व
4.35,37, 42, 59. At one place,
Patajali for purposes of argu-
ment has explained the word as
final in a word: cfनैर्वे विज्ञायते पदस्यान्त:
पदान्तः पदान्तादिति | कथं तर्हि ` पदे अन्त:
पदान्तः पदान्तादिति M. Bh. on VIII.
4.35.
पदार्थ meaning of a word, significa-
tion of a word; that which
corresponds to the meaning of a
word; sense of a word. Gram-
marians look upon both-the
generic notion and the individual
object as Padartha or meaning
of a word, and support their view
by guoting the sitras of Panini
जात्याख्यायामेक्रामिन् बहुवचनमन्यतरस्याम् I.
2.58 and सरूपाणामेकशेष एकविभक्तौ I.
2.64: cf किं पुनराकृतिः पदार्थ अार्होस्विद्
द्रव्यम् | उभयमित्याहृ 1 कथं ज्ञायत । उभयथा
ह्याचार्येण सूत्राणि प्रणीतानि " अाकृतिं प्रदर्थे |
मस्बा जात्याख्यायामित्युच्यते | द्रव्यं पदार्थं मत्वा
सरूपाणामित्येकशेष अारभ्यते, M. Bh. in
I. 1. first Ahnika. In rules of
grammar the meaning of a word
is generally the vocal element or
the wording, as the science of
grammar deals with words and
their formation: cf. स्वं रूपं इब्दस्याश्ाब्द-
" संज्ञा, P. I. 1. 68. The possession of
vocal element as the sense is
technically termed इब्दपदार्थकता as
opposed to अर्थपदार्थकता: cf. सोसौ
गेशब्दः स्वस्मात्पदार्थात्प्रच्युते यसौ अर्थपदा-
थैकता तस्याः शब्दपदार्थकः संपद्यत M. Bh.
I. 1.44 V. 3. The word पद
means also the categories or the
predicaments in connection with
the different Sastrhs or lores as
for instance, the 25 categories in
the Safnkhyasastra or 7 in the
Vaisesika system or 16 in the
NyayaSastra. The Vyakarabas-
stra, in this way to state, has only
one category the Akhandavakyas-
phoja o् .the radical meaning
given by the sentence
stroke.
in one
पद्मनाभ a grammarian who wrote a
treatise on grammar known as
the Supadma Vyakarana. He is
believed to have been an inhabi-
tant of Bengal who lived in the
fourteenth century A. D. Some
say that he was a resident of
Mithil.
पद्य forming a part of a word or
pada cf. उपोत्तमं नानुदात्तं न प्रद्यम् R.
Pr. I. 29; cf. also पूर्वपद्यः R. Pr. I.
30. The wword is used in this
sense ( पदावयव ) mostly in the
Prtiskhya works. The word is
used in the sense of पादसंपन्न, made
up of the feet (of verses), in the
Rk PratiSakhya in contrast with
अक्षये, made up of syllables. In
this sense the word is derived
from the word पाद: cf. पद्याक्षर्य स
उत्थित: R. Pr, XVIII. 3.
पर (l) subsequent,as opposed to पूर्व or
prior the word is frequently used
in grammar in connection with a
rule or an operation prescribed
later on in a grammar treatise; cf.
धिप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् P. I. 4. 2; ( 2 )
occurring after ( something ); cf.
प्रत्ययः परश्च P. III. 1.1 and 2: cf.
also तत् परस्वरम् T.Pr. XXI.2.(3)The
word सर is sometimes explained
in the sense of इट or desired,
possibly on the analogy of the
meaningश्रष्ठ possessed by the word.
This sense is given to the word
पर in the rule धिप्रातषेधे परं कार्यं with
a view to apply it to earlier rules
in cases of emergency: cf. विप्रतिषेधे
परं यदिष्टं तद्भवति M.Bh. 6h I.1.8.Vव्रrt,
6; परदब्दः इष्टवान्त्री M.Bh. on I. 2.5,
H. 4.2. Vart, 7; II. 1.69 etc.
_ K _ 6 -
परकयंत्व or परंकार्यत्वपक्ष the view that
the subsequent संज्ञा or technical
term should be preferred to the

परक्रम
221
पररूप
prior one, when both happen to
apply simultaneously to a word.
The word is frequently used in the
Mahbhasya as referring to the
reading आ कडारात् परं कार्यम् which is
believed to have been an alterna-
tive reading to the reading अा
कडारादेका संज्ञा;cf. ननु च यस्यापि परेर्कार्यत्वं
तेनापि परग्रहणं कर्तव्यम्:M. Bh. on I. 4.
1; also भवदकसंज्ञाधिकारे सिद्धम् | परंकार्यत्व
तु न सिद्धयात: M.Bh. on II. 1.20, II.
2.24.
परक्रम a term used in the Pratisakhya
works for doubling'of a consonant; |
cfः सान्तःस्थादौ धारयन्तः परक्रमम् | R. Pr.
XIV. 23.
परग्रहण the use of the word पर:inser-
tion of the word पर in a rulc: cf.
तेनापि परग्रहणं कर्तव्यम् : M.Bh. on I.4.1;
cf. also परग्रहृणमनथैक्रम् M.Bh. on III.
1.2.
परत्व posteriority;mention afterwards;
the word is frequently used in
works on grammar in connection
with a rule which is mentioned in
the treatise after another rule: the
posterior rule is looked upon as
stronger than the prior one, and is
given priority in application when
the two rules come in conflict
although technically they are
equally strong: cf. परत्वादल्छीप:; M.
Bh. on I. 1.4 Vart 7; 'परत्वाच्छभाव:
* I. 1.1 I etc.
परत्वन्याय application of the later
rule before the former one, accord-
* ing to the dictum laid down by
Pamini in the rule विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम्
- P. I. 4.2: cf. परत्वन्यायेी 'न लङ्किता भवति
Sira. Pari. 84,
परनिपात lit.placing after the placing
of a word in a compound after
another as contrasted with पूर्वनिपात.
A subordinate word is generally
placed first in a compound, cf.
उपसर्जनं पूर्वम्: in some exceptional
, cases however, this general rule is
परनिमित्तुक्र
not observed as in the cases of
राजद्न्त and the like, where the
subordinate word is placed after
the principal word, and which
cases, hence, are taken as cases
of परनिपात. The words पूर्वे and पर are
relative, and hence, the cases of
परनिपात with respect to the sub-
ordinate word ( उपसर्जन ) such as
राजद्न्त, प्राप्तजीविक etc. can be called
cases of पूर्वनिपात with respect to the
principal word ( प्रधान ) cf. पर्ता:
राजदन्तादित्वात्परनिपात: Ks. on P. II.
1.39.
_
caused by something
which follows; the term is used in
grammar in connection with some-
thing caused by what follows; cf.
परनिमित्तक्रीजादेद: पूर्वविधिं प्रति न स्थानिवत्
S. K.. on अन्वः परस्मिन्पूर्वधीP.I.1.57.
परमप्रति the most original base; the
original of the original base; the
word is used in connection with a
base which is not a direct base to
which an affix is added, but which
is a remote base;cf. अापत्यो वा गेात्रम् |
परमप्रकृतश्च अापत्यः । M. Bh. on P.IV.1.
89; cf also M. Bh. om IV.1.93,98,
163.
परमाणु a time-unit equal to one-half
of the unit called अणु, which forms
one-half of the unit called मात्रा
which is required for the purpose
of the utterance of a consonant;
cfः परमाणु अघणुमात्रा V. Pr.I.61. परमाणु,
in short, is the duration of very
infinitesimal time equal to the
pause between two individual
continuous sounds. The interval
between the utterances of two
consecutive consonants is given to
be equivalent to one Paramanu;
cf. वर्णान्तरं परमाणु R.T.84. _
पररूप the form of the subsequent
letter (परस्य रूपम्). The word is used
in grammar when the resultant of
' the two coalescing vowels ( एकादं★ा)

परचाळङ्गतt 222
_-_--__
g the latter vowel itSelf. as for
sace in प्रजते ( प्र+एजते ) **
एड. पररूपम् P.VI.1.9.
परवळिङ्गता possession of the gender of
तंnal member of a compound
word, which, in tatpurusa co?PP
unds, is the second of the two ?
\1ast out of many cf परवछि
द्वन्द्वतत्पुरुषयेीः (P. II.4 26)इति परवाळिङ्कता
् ्त् M. Bh. on P. V. 4.68.
घरधप्रतिषेध the conflict between two
rules (by occurrence together)
when the latter prevails over the
former and takes place by. Virtue
3f the dictnm विप्रतिषेधे पंर कार्यम् P. .
4.2: cf. कथं ये परविप्रतिषेधाः M.Bh. on
I.4.2.
परसप्तमी a locative case in the sense
of what follows', as contrasted
with विषयसप्तमी, अधिकरणसतमी and the
like: cf. ढकीतिनैषा परसप्तमी द्राक्या विज्ञातुं
न ढिलुका पौर्वापर्यमस्ति ' का तर्हि , सत्सप्तमी
M.Bh. om P.I.2. 49.
परसवर्ण cognate of the latter vowel
पर!
न, व: and म:, while the term
आत्मनेपद is used in connection with
thc next nine त, आताम् etc-: cf परस्मै
परोढार्थफलकं पदम् Vac. Kosa. The
term परस्मैपद is explained by some
as representing the Active_Voice
as contrasted with the Passive
Voice which necessarily is charac-
terized by the Atmanepada affixes.
The term परस्मैभाष in the sense of
परस्मैपद was used by ancient gra-
mmarians and is also found in the
Varttika अात्मनभाषपर्मेभाषयोरुपसंख्यानम्
P. VI. 8.8 Vart. ]. The term
परस्मैभाष as applied to roots, could
be explainedas परस्मै क्रियां (orक्रियाफलं)
भाषन्त इति परस्मैभाषाः and originally
such roots as had their activity
meant for another, used to take
the परस्मैपद् affixes, while the rest
which had the activity meant for
self, took the अात्मनपद affixes. Roots
having activity for both, took both
the terminations and were termed
उभयपदिनः.
or consonant The word is fre- | परस्मैभाष lit.speaking the activity or
Guently used in grammar in conn-
6ctionwith a substitute or आदेश
which is specified to be cognate
( सवर्ण ) of the succeeding vowel or
consonant: cf. अनुस्वारस्य ययि परसवर्ण:
P.VIII. 4. 58.
परस्परव्यपेक्षा mutual expectancy
possessed by two words, which is
called सामथ्र्य in grammar. Such an
expectancy is necessary between
the two or more words which form
a compound: cf. परस्परव्यपेक्षां सामथ्र्यमेके
P.II.1.1, V.4; cf. also इह्य राज्ञ: पुरुष
इत्युक्तं राजा पुरुषमपेक्षते ममायमिति पुरुषोपि
राजानमपक्षत अहृमस्य इति | M.Bh. om II.
1.1.
परस्मैपद a term used in grammar
with reference to the personal affixs
ति, त: etc. applied to roots. The
term परस्मैपद is given to the first
nine afixes ति, त:, अन्ति, स, थ:, थ,
क्रिया for another; a term ofancient
grammarians for roots taking the
first nine personal affixes only viz.
ति, तः... मसू. The term परस्मैपदिन् was
substituted for परमैभाष later on,more
commonly. See परस्मैपद above. The
term परस्मैभाष along with अात्मनेभाष is
found almost invariably used in the
Dhatupagha attributed to Panini;
cf. भू सत्तायेाम् | उदात्त: परस्मैभाषः | एघादय
उदात्त अनुदातत अात्मनभाषा: Dhatu-
patha.
परt the higicst eternal voice or
word, the highest and the most
lofty of the our divisions of
language (च|), viz. परा,पदयन्ती, मध्यमा
and वैखरी, which, (परा), philosophi-
cally is identificd with नाद ( व्रह्म )
or इन्दव्रह्म. It is described as वणदि-
विशेषरहुितांचतनमिश्रा सृष्ट्युपयोगिना जगदुपादा-
नभूता कुण्डलिनीरूपेण प्राणिनां मूलाधारे वर्तते |

पंर
223
परिभाषा
कुण्डलिन्याः प्राणवायुसंयोगे परा व्यज्यते | इयं
निःष्पन्दा पदयन्त्यादयः सरुपन्दा अस्या विश्वंर्तः !
इयमेव सूक्ष्मस्फोट इत्युच्यते !
पराङ्गवद्भाव behaviour as having be-
come a part and parcel of another ;
treatment of a word as a part of
another. The term is used by
Panini in connection with a word
followed by and connected with a
word in the vocative case ofwhich
it is looked upon as a part for
purposes ofaccent, e. g. कुण्डनाटन् ,
मद्राणां राजन् etc. Here the words अटन्
and राजन् , being in the vocative
' case, are अाद्युदात्त, i.e. अ ( at the
beginning of अटन्) and अा (in राजन्)
are acute and as a result all the
other vowels in कुण्डनाटन् and मद्राणां
राजन् become अनुदात्त or grave; cf.
सुबामन्त्रित पराङ्गवत्स्वर P.II.1.2.
परादि initial or first of the next or
succeeding word; cf. किं पुनरयं पूर्वान्त
आहोस्वित्परादि: अहस्त्रिदभक्त: M.Bh on
P. I. 1.47 Wart. 3; cf. also M. Bh.
on IV.1.87, IV.2. 91.
परादिसस्वर a consonant belonging to
the succeeding vowel in syilabica-
tion; cf. R.Pr.I.15.
परार्थ (1) the sense of another word;
' cf. पराथीभधानं वृत्तिः इत्याहुः | M.Bh. on
II.1.1,Vart.2; (2) for the sake of,or
being of use in,the next (सूत्र);cf.परार्थ
मम भविष्यति सन्यत इद्भवतीति, M. Bh. on
I.1.59 Vart. 8.
परिछष्ट dragged to the latter: cf.
Puspasutra III. 114; the word परि
stands for पर् here.
परिक्रम the same as परक्रम; doubling
(द्वित्व ) of a subsequent consonant
as for example the doubling of स्
in इर्मन् स्स्याम: cf. सान्त:स्थ|दौ धारयन्तः
परक्रमं (v. I. परिक्रमं) R.Pr. XIV. 23.
परिगणन lit. enumeration. The word
is used in grammar treatises in the
sense of a definite or complete |
enumeration' with a view to ex-
clude those that are not included
in the enumeration : cf परिगणनं
कर्तव्यम् | यङ्यक्यवलेपे प्रतिषेधः M.Bh. on
I.1.4 Vart. 1.
परिग्रह also परिग्रहृण. (1) acceptance, in-
clusion: cf. किं प्रयोजनम् | प्रत्ययार्थ
परिग्रह्यार्थम् M.Bh. on P.III.26.1 ; (2)
repetition of a Sarhhit word in the
Pada recital, technically named
वेष्टक्र also; repetition of a word with
इति interposed; e. g. सुप्राव्या इति सुत्रs
अव्या: Rg Veda II.13.9, अलला भवन्ती-
रित्यलळाSभवन्तीः Rg. IV.18.6: cf. परिग्रहं
त्बनार्थान्तात् तेन वैक्राक्षरीक्तात् | परषां न्यास-
मान्वारे व्यालस्तौ चेत्स्वरौ परी: R. Pr. III.
14. cf. also, R.Pr.XI.32,36,42.
परिनिष्ठित completely formed; with
the formation completely achieved;
स्वार्थे पृरिपूर्णम् : cf. पुरिनिष्ठितस्य पदान्तरसंबन्धे
हुि गौर्वाहृकिं इत्यादौ गौणुस्वप्रतीतिर्न तु प्रातिपदि-
कसंस्कारवलायाम् Par. Sek. on Pari. 15.
परिपन्न a kind of Sarhdhi or coale-
scence characterized by the change
of the consonant म् into an anu-
svara, as by मेोनुस्वारः P. VIII. 3.23,
before a sibilant or beforeरेफ: cf.
रेफोष्मणोरुदययोमैकारः अनुस्वारं तत् परिपलमाहुः
R.Pr.IV.5; cf. also सम्राट्ाब्दः परिसं-
पन्नापवाद: R.Pr.IV.7.
परिभाषा an authoritative statementor
dictum, helping () the correct
interpretation of the rules (stitras)
ofgrammar, or (2) the removal of
conflict between two rules which
occur simultaneously in the process
of the formation of words, (पदसिाद्ध),
or (3) the formation of correct
words. Various definitions of the
word परिभाषा are given by commen-
tators, the prominent ones being-
परितो व्यापृतां भाषां परिभाषां प्रचक्षत(न्यास):or,
परितं भाष्यते या सा परिभाषा प्रक्रीर्तिता. The
word is also defined as विधौ नियामक-
रिणी परिभाषा ( दुर्गसिंहृवृत्त ). परिभाषा can
also be briefiy defined as the

पारेभाषा
convention of a standard author.
Purusottamadeva applies the word
परिभाषा to the maxims of standard
writers, cf. परिभाषा हिं न पाणिनयान
वन्वनानि: Puru. Pari. 1 I9; while
Haribhaskara at the end of his
treatise परिभाषाभास्कर, states that
Vyadi was the first writer on
Paribhiss. The rules तस्मिन्निति निर्दिष्ट
पूर्वस्य, तस्मादित्युत्तरस्य and others are in
fact Paribhasa rules laid down by
Panini. For the difference between
परिभाषा and अाधकार, see Mahabhasya
on II.1.1. Many times the writers
of Sitras lay down certain conven-
tions for the proper interpretation
of their rules, to .which additions
are made in course of time accor-
ding to necessities that arise, by
commentators. In the different
systems of grammar there are
different collections of Paribhasas.
In Pagini's system, apart from
commentaries thereon, there are
independent collections of Pari-
bhags by Vyadi, Bhojadeva,
Purusottamadeva, Sradeva, Nila-
kantha, Haribhaskara, Nigesa and
a few others, There are inde-
pendent collections of Pari-
bhs in the Katantra, Cand-
ra, Sakarayana,.Jainendra and He-
macandra systems ofgrammar.It is
a noticeable fact that many Pari-
' bhasas are common, with their
wordings guite similar or some-
times identical in the different
systems. Generally the collections
of Paribhass have got scholiums
or commentaries by recognised
grammarians, which in their turn
have sometimes other glosses or
commentaries upon them. The
Paribhasendusekhara of Nagesa is
am authoritative work of an out-
standing merit in the system of
Paninis Grammar, which is com-
224
mented upon by more than
twenty five scholars during the last
two or three centurics. The tota
number of Paribhasas in the difep-
: ent systems of grammar may well-
nigh exceed 500. See परिभाषासंग्रहृ.
परिभाषाप्रकारा an independent trea-
tise explaining the various Pari-
bhass in the system of Paninig
grammar, written by Visnusesa of
the famous SeSa family. -
परिभषाप्रदीपार्चिस् a scholarly inde-
pendent treatise on Vyakarana
Paribhss written by Udayarh-
kara Pathaka, called also Nव्रna
Pathaka, a Nagara Brahmana,
who lived at Benares in the
middle of the 18th century A. D.
He has also written commenta-
ries on the two Sekharas of
NageSa.
परिभाषाभास्कर (1) a treatise on the
, Paribhsas in Panini's grammar
# written by Haribhskara Agni-
् hotr, son of Appjibhaga Agni-
hotri, who lived in the seventeenth
century : (2) a treatise ora Panini-
paribhass, as arranged by Sra-
deva, written by Sesadrisuddhi,
परिभाषार्थसंग्रहृ a treatise on the Pari-
bhaas in the system of Pnimis
rammar written by Vaidyanatha
Sवstrin.
परिभाषावृत्ति a general name given to
an explanatory independent work
on Paribhass of the type of a
gloss on a collection of Pari-
bhass, irrespective of the system
of grammar, whether it be that
of Panini, or of Katantra, or of
Jainendra or of Hemacandra. The
treatises of Vyadi (Panini system),
Durgasirhha and BhavamiSra
(Katantra system), Purusottama-
deva and Sradeva (Panini system),

परिभाषावृत्तिटिप्पणी 225
परिभाषेन्दुशेखर
Abhyankar (Jainendra system)
and others are all known by the
name Paribhasawritti.
परिभाषावृत्तिाटप्पणी a very briefcomm-
entary on the Paribhasavrtti of
Stradeva written by Srimnasarman
of Campahatt.
परिभाषावृत्तिटीका a commentary on
the Paribhasavrtti of Siradeva
written by Ramabhadra Diksita
who lived in the seventeenth
century A. D.
परिभाषासेग्रह a work containing a
collection of independent works on
Paribhºss in the several systems
of Sanskrit Grammar, compiled
by M. M. K. V. Abhyankar.
The collectlon consists of the
following works (i) परिभाषासूचन con-
taining 93 Paribhiss with a
commentary by Vyadi, an ancient
grammarian who lived before
Patanjali; ( ii ) ब्याडीयपरिभाषापाठ, a
bare text of 140 Paribhsवs be-
longing to the school of Vyadi
(iii) शाकटायनपरिभाषासूत्र a text of 98
Paribhasa aphorisms, attributed
to the ancient grammarian Sika-
tayana,or belonging to that school;
[iv) चान्द्रपरिभाषासूत्र a text of 86
Paribhas aphorisms given at the
end ofhis grammar work by Can-
dragomin; (v) कातन्त्रपरिभाषासूत्रवृत्ति a
gloss on 65 Paribhas aphorisms of
the Katantra school by Durgasirhha:
(vi) कातन्त्रपारभाषासूत्रवृत a short gloss
on 62 Paribhasa aphorisms of the
Katantra school by BhvamiSra;
(vii) कातन्त्रपरिभाषासूत्र a text of 96
Paribhasa rules belonging to the
Katantra school without any
author's name associated with it;
(viii) कालापपरिभाषासूत्र a text of
118 Paribhasa rules belonging
to the Kalapa school without any
author's name associated with it;
(ix) जेनन्द्रपारभाषाढात a gloss written
29
by M. M. K. V. Abhyankar ( the
compiler of the collection), on 108
Paribhss or maxims noticeable in
the Mahavrtti ofAbhayanandin on
theJainendra Vyakarana of Pujya-
pada Devanandin; (x) भेोजदवकृतपरि-
भाषासूत्र a text of 118 Paribhaga rules
given by Bhoja in the second pada
of the first adhyaya ofhis grammar
work named Sarasvatikanthabha-
rana; (xi) न्यायसंग्रहृ a bare text of
140 paribhass(which are called by
the name nyaya) given by Hema-
harhsaga in his paribhaswork
named न्यायसंग्रहृ; (xii) लधुपरिभाषावृत्ति
a glcss on 120 Paribhasas of the
Panini school written by Puruso-
ttamadeva; (xiii) वृहृत्परिभाषावृत्ति con-
taining 130 Paribhas with a
commentary by Siradeva and a
very short,gloss on the commen-
tary by Srimanasarmang ( xiv )
परिभाषावृत्ति a short gloss on 140Pari-
bhsas of the Panini school written
by Nilakatha; (xv) परिभाषाभास्कर a
collection of 132 Paribhasनs with
a commentary by Haribhiskara
Agnihotri; (xvi) bare text of Pari-
bhas given and explained by
Nagesabhatta in his Paribhasendu-
sekhara. The total number of
Paribhass mentioned and treated
in the whole collection exceeds
five hundred.
परिभाषास्वन an old work on the
Paribhass in the system of
Panini's Grammar, believed to
have been written by Vyadi, who
lived after Katyayana and before
Patafijali. The work is written '
in the old style of the Mahabha-
Sya and consists of a short com-
mentary on 93 Paribhasas.
परिभाषेन्दुशेखर the reputed authori-
tative work on the Paribhasis in
the system of Panini's grammar
written by Nagesabhatta in the

पथििमळ
226
__
परांक्ष
beginning of the 18th century
A.TD. at Benares. The work is
studied very widely and has got
more than 25 commentaries
written by pupils in the spiritual
line of Ngesa. Weli-known among
these commentaries are those
written by Vaidyanatha Paya-
gupde ( called गदा ), by Bhaira-
vamiSra ( called मिश्री), by Ragha-
vendracarya Gajendragadakara
( called त्रिपथगा ), by Govindद्व-
crya Asgaputre of Poona in the
beginning of the nineteenth cen-
tury (called भावार्थदीपिका), by Bha-
skaraSastri Abhyankar of Satara
(called भास्करी ), and by M. M.
Vasudevasastri Abhyankar of
Poona (called तत्त्वाद् ). Besides
these, there are commentaries
written by Tatya Sastrº Pata-
wardhana, Ganapati Sastri Mo-
kate, Jayadeva Misra, Visnu-
Sastri Bhat, Wishwanatha Dan-
dibhatta, Harinatha Dwiwed
Gopalacarya Karhadkar, Hari-
shastri Bhagawata,Govinda Shastri
Bharadwaja, Narayana Shastri
Galagali, Weimadhava Shukla,
Brahmananda Saraswati, ManisiSe-
SaSarma, Manyudeva, Sarhkara-
bhatta, Indirapati, Bhimacarya
Galagali, Madhavacarya Waikar,
Cidrupasraya, BhTmabhatta, Lak-
Sminrsirhha and a few others.
Some of these works are named by
their authors as TTks, others as
Vyakhys and still others as
Tippanis or Vivrtis.
परिमल a work on Grammar attri-
buted to Amaracandra.
परिमाण a word used by Panini in
तदस्य परिमाणम् W. ].19 and explained
by Patafijali as सर्वतं मानम् .Sankhya
( number ) is also said to be
a parimaha. Parimana is of two
kinds- नियत or definite as in the
case of Khar, droha etc; and आनयत,
as in the case of Gana, Sargha,
Pga, Sartha, Sen etc. The term
परिमाण, in connection with the
utterance of letters, is used in the
sense of मात्राकाल or one mora.
परिलोप elision ofa phonetic member:
the same as lopa in the Grammar
of Pmini. The term परिलेप and
the verbal forms of the root परिलुप्
are found in the Pratisakhya works;
cf. उष्मा परिलुप्यत त्रयाणाम् R. Pr. II. 4.
परिवर्तन reversion in the order of
words as found in the recital of
the Vcda at the time of the recital
of जटा, घन and other artificial types
of recitations.
परिसंख्यान ]it. enumeration; enuncia-
tion : mention ; the word is found
generally used by Katyayana and
other Varttikakaras at the end of
their Varttikas. The words वक्तव्यम्,
वाच्यम् , and the like, are similarly
used.
परिसमाप्ति application of the complete
sense; the word is found used in
the three alternative views about
the application of the full sense of
a sentence,- collectively, in-
dividually or in both the ways, to
the individuals concerned ; cf.प्रत्येकं
वाक्यपरिसमाति:, समुदाय वाक्यपरिसमाप्तः,
उभयथा वाक्यपरिसमाप्तिः ; cf. M. Bh. I.
1.1 Vart- 12; ( 2 ) completion : cf.
वृत्करणं ल्वादीनां प्वादीनां च परिसमाप्त्यर्थमिति
K8. on WII. 3.80.
परिहृार (1) removal of a difficulty, cf.
अन्यथा कृत्वा चोदितमन्यथा कृत्वा परिहृारं: M.
Bh. on P. IV. 1.7. Vart. 3: (2)
repetition in the Padapatha, Kra-
mapatha etc. e. g अकरित्यक:. In
this sense the word is found in the
neuter gender ; cf. रेफपरिहृाराभि A. Pr.
III. 1.1.
परोक्ष used as an adjective of the
word भू meaning *past tense'; lit.
g *p

परोक्षा
227
पइवोदि
behind the eyes, unnoticed by the
eyes. The word is generally used in
the sense of remote or long (past)
or 'perfect'. For the alternative
explanation of the word परोक्ष, cf.
कथंजातीयकं पुनः परोक्षे नाम | केचित्तावदाहुः
वृषेदातृवृत्तं परोक्षमिति | अपर आहुः क्रटान्तारेतं
पुरोक्षमिति | अप्र आहुहृहृवृत्तं कार्यहंवृत्तं चेति | |
M.Bh. on परोक्षे लिट् P. III.2.115.
परोक्षा iit. behind the eyes; remote; |
the term is found used by ancient
grammarians and also referred to
in the Mahabhsya as referring to
the perfect tense called लिट् in
Panini's grammar: cf. ज्ञापकात्परोक्षायां
( लिटि ) न भविष्यति | M.Bh. on P. I.
2.28: cf. also न व्यथत: परीक्षायाम् Kat.
III.4.21.
पर्जन्यवल्लक्षणप्रवृत्ति the application of
a grammatical rule or operation
like the rains which occur on dry
land as also on the sea surface: cf.
कृतृक्रे खल्वपि शास्त्रं पर्जन्यवत् | तद्यथा |
पर्जन्यो यावदूनं पूर्णं च सर्वमभिवर्षति	M.Bh.
on P.I. 1.29 ; VI. 1.127: cf also
यथा पृजेन्यः यावदूनं पूर्णं वाभिवर्षति एवं
क्षणुमपि दीर्घस्य दीर्घत्वम् ， चिचीषति, बुभूषति
Vyadi. Pari. 58, cf कृतकारि ईाख्नं
मू न चाकृतकारि दहृनवत् Puruso. Pari.
6.
पपक्ष a class of words headed by
the word प to which the tad.
affix इक (ष्ठन्) is added in the sense
of *moving by' or feating along
with' ( तन वरत ): e.g. पर्षिकः, पपिंक्री;
अश्धिक्र:, अश्विकी etc.; cf. Ka8. on P.
IV.4.10.
पयोय (l) serial order or succession as
opposed to simultaniety ; the word
is used in grammar in connection
with a rule which, as the objector
for the sake of argument, would
like to hold and would apply by
' succession with respect to the rule
in conflict, either before it or
after it i.e. alternatively; cf. पर्याय:
पर्यायवचन
प्रसज्येत often found used in the
Mahabhasya as for example .9n
I.4.1 etc.: c. also तृजादयः पर्यायेण
भवन्ति M.Bh. on P. I. 4.2. Vart. 3;
( 2 ) alternative word,. synonym;
cf. अभिज्ञावचने लुट् | वचनग्रहणं पर्यायार्थमू !
अ:भजानासि स्मरोसं बुध्यसे चतयसे इति !
Ka. on P. III.2.112.
synonym, synonymous
word: cf. जित् पर्यायवचनस्येव राजाद्यर्थम् !
इनसभम् | ईश्वरसभम् M.Bh. on I.1.68;
cf. also यदयं क्रस्यन्वित्पयोयवचनस्य ग्रहृणं
क्ररेति , अधिपतिदायादति M. Bh. on
II. 3.9.
पयुद्ास (1) exclusion; negation with a
view to exclude; one of the two
senses ( प्रसज्यप्रतिषेध and पयुदास ) of
the negative particle नञ्ज, generally |
found in cases when the particle
नञ् is compounded with a noun,
and not used independently with
a verbal form or a verbal activity ;
e. g. अत्राह्मणः; अनचि च्व; cf. अन-
पुंसकात् ' नायं प्रसज्यप्रतिषेधो नपुंसकस्य नेति !
किं ताई । पर्युदासोयं यदन्यन्नपुंसकंीदिति	M.
Bh. on I.1.43: cf also प्रसज्यप्रतिषेधः
ख्यात् क्रियया सहृ यत्र नञ् | पयुदास: स
विज्ञेयो यत्रोत्तरपदेन नञ् | (2) removal
in general, not by the use of a
negative particle: cf. पाठात्पर्युदासः
कर्तव्यः , बुद्धानां पठितानां संज्ञाः कर्तव्या |
M. Bh. on I. 1.27 Vrt. 3.
पवेन् word, pada; lit. member of a
sentence; the word is found used
in the sense of पद in the old Pra-
tisakhya Literature: cf. अन्तरेण पर्वेणीं !
पर्वदाबेदनं पदमुच्यते | प्रद्योर्मथ्य अागमे
भवति | यथा प्राङ्कसोमः, प्राङ्कक्सीम: Uvvata
on V. Pr. I. 138.
पूर्वादि a class of words headed by
the word पई to which the tad.
affix अ ( अण् ) is added without
any change of sense provided the
words पई and others, to which
the affix अ is to be added mean
fighting clans; e. g. पाईौव, आसुर:,

पलद्यादि
राक्षसः, दाढाई: etc.
W. 3.117.
पलद्यादि a class of words headed
by the word पलदी to which the
tad. affix अण् is applied in the
miscellaneous ( शैषिक) senses; e g-
पालद:, पारिषदः, रौमक:: पाटचर: etc. cf.
KS, on P. IV. 2.110.
| पलाइादि a class of words headed by
the word पलाइ to which the affix
अ (अञ् ) is added in the sense of
*a product of* or a part of:' e g-
पाल्:, खादिरः, वैकङ्कतः etc. cf KS.
on P. IV. 3.141.
पश्यन्ती name of the second out of
the four successive stages in the
origination or utterance of a
word from the mouth. Accord-
ing to the ancient writers on
Phoneties, sound or word ( वाक् )
which is constituted of air ( वायु )
originates at the Muladharacakra
where it is called परा. It then
springs up and it is called पदयन्ती
in the second stage, Thence it
comes up and is called मध्यमा in
the third stage; rising up from the
third stage when the air strikes
against the vocal chords in the
glottis and comes in contact with
the different parts of the mouth,
it becomes articulate and is heard
in the form of different sounds.
when it is called वैखरी: cf. वैखर्या
मध्यमायाश्च पश्यन्त्याश्चैतदद्भुतम् | अनेकतीर्थ-
भदायास्त्रय्या चाचः परं पदमे Vakyapadya
I. 144, and also cf. पश्यन्ती तु सा
चलाचलप्रतिबद्धसमाधाना संनिर्विष्ट्याक्रारा
प्रतिलींनाकारा निराकारा च परिच्छिन्नार्थप्रत्यघ-
भासा संसृष्टार्थप्रत्यवभासा च प्रशान्तसर्वार्थ-
प्रत्यवभासा चत्यपरिमितभेद | पद्यन्त्या रूप-
मनपभ्रंशामसंकीर्ण लेोकव्यवह्यरातीतम्	com.
on Wakyapadya I. 144. cf. also
तत्र श्रोत्रविषया वैखरी | मध्यमा हृदयदशेस्था
पदप्रत्यक्षानुपपत्त्या व्यवहारकारणम् | पश्यन्ती
दु लेोकव्यवहारातीता | योगिनां तु तत्रापि
cf. Ks, on
228
पाठ
प्रकृतिप्रत्ययविभागावगतिरस्ति | परायां तु न इति
ऋद्ध्या इत्युक्तम्	Uddyota on चत्वारि
वाक्परिमिता पदानि ? M. Bh. Ahnika 1.
पखपरा called also पस्पशाह्निक: name
given to the first or introductory
chapter ( अाहृिक ) of the Maha-
bhsya of Patanjali. The word
occurs first in the SiSupalavadha of
Magha. The word is derived from
पस्पर्श् , the frequentative base of स्पछर्
to touch or to see (ancient use).
Possibly it may be explained as
derived from रप् with अपु: cf. शब्द
बिद्यव नो भाति राजनीतिरपस्पशाा Sis.II.112.
Mallinatha has understood the
word परपद m. and explained it as
introduction to a Sastra treatise:
cf. परपदा: इास्त्रारम्भसमर्थक उपेद्वातसंदर्भग्रन्थः
Mallinatha on SiS. II. 12.
पाकवती a word used in the Siks
works for a kind ofpause or hiatus.
पाक्षिक alternative; occurring option-
ally or alternatively; cf. पाक्षिक्र एष
देष: M. Bh. on II.3.46 Virt. 8;VI.
1.6IVart. 4, cf. also पाक्षिक एक्श्रुत्य-
विधिर्भवति Ks. on P. I.2.36.
पाञ्चमिक lit.pertaining to the fifh;
name given to the affixes prescrib-
ed in the fifth Adhyaya of Paninis
Astadhyayi, especially in Sutras
V.2.1 to W.2.93.
पाठ (1) recital of a sacred Vedic
or Sastra work; the original reci-
tal of an authoritative text;(2) the
various artificial ways or methods
of such a recital; c.g. पदपाठ, क्रमपाठ
etc. in the case of Vedic Literature:
(3) an original recital such as the
स्त्रपाठ, घातुपाठ, गणपाठ, बार्तिकपाठ and
परिभाषापीठ in the case of the several
systems of Sanskrit Grammar; the
five Pathas are called पञ्चपाठी; (4)
recitation; cf. नान्तरण पाटं स्वरा अनुबन्धाः
वा इक्या विज्ञातुम् M. Bh. on P.I.3.1
Vart. 13; (5) reading, variant: cf.

पाठक
चूर्णादीनि अप्राण्युपग्रहादिति सूत्रस्य पाठान्तरम्
229
पाणिनि
Kas. on P.V.2.134.
पाठक orउदयंकरपाठक name of a scholar
of Sanskrit Grammar who wrote
an independent work on Pari-
bhasas and commentaries on the
ParibhaSendusekhara and Laghu-
5abdendusekhara. See उदयंकर and
परिभाषाप्रदीपार्वसू.
पाठकी name popularly given to the
पाणिनि the iIlustrious ancient
commentaries written byउदयंकरपाठक्र.
See पाटक.
gra-
mmarian of India who is well-
known by his magnum opus, the
Astaka or Astadhyayi which has
maintained its position as a unique
work on Sanskrit grammar un-
paralleled upto the present day by
any other work on grammar, not
only of the Sanskrit language, but
ofany other language, classical as
well as spoken. His mighty inte-
lligence grasped, studied and
digested not only the niceties of
accentuation and formation of
Wedic words, scattered in the vast
Vedic ILiterature of his time, but
those of classical words in the
classical literature and the spoken
Sanskrit language of his time in
all its different aspects andshades,
noticeable in the various provin-
ces and districts of the vast coun-
try. The result of his careful study
of the Wedic Literature and close
observation of.the classical Sans-
krit,which was a spoken language in
his days, was the production of the
wonderful and monumental work,
the Agtadhyayi,which givesan auth-
oritative description of the Sanskrit
language, to have a complete ex-
position of which,several life times
have to be spent,in spite ofseveral
commentaries upon it, written
|
-
-
-
from time to time by several dis-
tinguished scholars. The work is a
linguists and not a language
teacher's. Some Western scholars
have described it as a wonderful
specimen of human intelligence,or
as a notable manifestation of
human intelligence. Very little is
known unfortunately about his
native place,parentage or personal
history. The account given about
these in the Kathasaritsgara and
other books is only legendary and
hence, it has very little historical
value. The internal evidence,
supplied by his work shows that
he lived in the sixth or the seventh
century B. C., if not earlier,
in the north western province of
India of those days. Jinendra-
buddhi, the author of the
Kasikavivaratrapafijik or Nyasa,
has stated that the word ढालातुर्
mentioned by him in his stitra
( IV. 3.94 ) refers to his mative
place and the word शालातुरीय deriv-
ed by him from the word इलातुर
by that sutra was, in fact his own
name, based upon the name of
the town which formed his native
place. Panini has shown in his
work his close knowledge of, and
familiarity with, the names of
towns, villages, districts, rivers and
mountains in and near Wahika,
the north-western Punjab of the
present day, and it is very likely
that he was educated at the
ancient University of Taksasil.
Apart from the authors of the
Pratisakhya works, which in a way
could be styled as grammar works,
there were scholars of grammar
as such, who preceded him and
out of whom he has , mentioned
ten viz., Apisali, _ Sakarayana,
Gargya, Sakalya, Kईyapa, Bhद्व- .

पाणिनिसूत्र
radwaja, Glava, Cakravarmaa
Senaka and Sphotyana The
grammarian Indra has not been
mentioned by Parini, although
tradition says that he was the first
grammarian of the Sanskrit
language. It is yery likely that
Panini had no grammar work of
Indra before him, but at the same
time it can be said that the works
of some grammariars , mentioned
by Panini such as Sakatyana,
Apisali, Gargya and others had
been based on the work of Indra.
The mention of several ganas as
also the exhaustive enumeration
of all the two thousand and two
hundred roots in the Dhtupatha
can very well testify to the ex-
istence of systematic grammatical
works before Parhini of which he
has made a thorough study and a
careful use in the composition of
his Ganapatha and Dhatupagha.
His exhaustive grammar of a rich
language like Sanskrit has not
only remained superb in spite of
several other grammars of the
language written subsequently,
but its careful study is felt as a
supreme necessity by scholars of
philology and linguistics of the
present day for doing any real
work in the vast field of linguistic
research. For details see pp.151-
154 Vol. VII of Patanjala Mah.
bhsya, D. E. Society's Edition.
पाणिनिसूत्र called also by the name
अष्टक्र or पाणिनीय-अटक: name given to
the Suitras of Panini comprising
eight adhyayas or books. The total
number of Stras as commented
' upon by the writers of the Kasika
and the Siddhantakaumudi is 3983.
As nine sutras out of these are
described as Varttikas and two as
, Ganastras by Patafijali, it is
230 पाणिनिसूत्रवार्तिक
evident that there were 3972
Stras in the Astaka of Panini
according to Patafijali. A verse
current among Waiyakarana
schools states the number to be
3996; cf. त्रीणि सूत्रसह्यखाणि तथा नव शतानि
व ' षण्णवतिश्च सूत्रेाणां पाणिनिः कृतवान्
स्वयम् | The traditional recital by
Veda Scholars who look upon the
Astadhyayi as a Vedanga, consists
of 3983 Sitras which are accepted
and commented upon by all later
grammarians and commentators.
The Stºtras of Panini, which mainly
aim at the correct formation of
words, discuss declension, conjuga-
tion, euphonic changes, verbal
derivatives, noun derivatives and
accents. For details see Vol.VII,
Vyakarana Mahabhasya, D. E.
Society's edition pp. 152-162.
पाणिनिसूत्रवार्तिक name given to the
collection of explanatory pithy
notes of the type of Sitras written.
mainly by Katyayana. The Var-
ttikas are generally written in the
style of the Stºtras, buf sometimes
they are written in Verse also.
The total number of Varttikas is
well-nigh above 5000, including
Varttikas in Verse.There are three
kinds ofVarttikas; cf.उक्तानुक्तदुरुक्तानां
चिन्ता यत्र प्रवर्तते | तं ग्रन्थं वार्तिकं प्राहुर्वार्तकज्ञा
मनीषिणः | Nagesa appears to have
divided Varttikas into two classes
as shown by his definition * सूत्रेs
नुक्तदुरुक्ताचिन्ताक्रत्वं वार्तिकत्वम् ?. If this
definition be followed, many of the
Varttikas given in the Mahibhasya
as explaining and commenting
. upom the Sutras will not strictly
be termed as Varttikas, and their
total number which is given as
exceeding 5000, will be reduced
to about 1400 or so. There are
some manuscript copies which
give this reduced number, and it

पाणिनिसूत्रवृत्ति
281 पात्रेसमितावि
may besaid that only these Vartti- ;
kas were written by Katyayana
while the others were added by
learned grammarians after Katy- !
yana- In the Mahabhasya there are ;
seen more than 5000 statements
of the type of Varttikas out of
which Dr. Kielhorn has marked
about 4200 as Varttikas. At some
places the Mahabhasyakara has
guoted the names of the authors
of some Warttikas or their schools,
in words such as क्रीयाः पठन्ति, ;
भारद्वाजीयाः पठन्ति, सौनागाः पठन्ति. etc.
Many of the Varttikas given in the
Mahabhasya are not seen in the
Kasikavrtti, while some more are
seen in the Kasik-vrtti, which,
evidently are composed by scholars
who fourished after Patanjali,
as they have not been noticed by
the Mahabhasyakra. It is very ]
difficult to show separately the
statements of the Bhsyakara popu-
Harly named *istis' from the Vartti-
kas ofKatyayana and others. For
details see Vol. VII Mahabhsya,
ID.E. Society's edition pp. 193-224.
पाणिनिसूत्रवृत्ति a gloss on the gram-
mar rules of Panini Many glosses
were written from time to time on
the Sitras of Panini, out of which
the most important and the oldest
one is the one named Kasikavrtti,
written by the joint authors Jaya-
ditya and Vamana in the 7th
century A.D. It is believed that
the Ksikivrtti was based upon
some old Wrttis said to have been
written by कुण, निर बुा, श्वोभूत
वररुवि and others.Besides Ksika,the
famous Vrtti, and those of कुणि,निर्धार |
and others which are only report-
ed, there are other Vpttis which
are comparatively modern. Some
of them have been printed, while
others have remained only in
manuscript form. Some of these
are : the Bhºsavrtti by Puruso-
ttamadeva, Vyakarahasudhanidhi
by Visvesvara, Guidharthadipin
by SadasivamiSra, Stravrtti by
Annambhtta, Vaiyakaranasarvasva
by Dharanidhara, Sabdabhaa
by Narayana Pandita, Pafini-
stravrtti by Ramacandrabhatta
Tare and Vyākaranadipika by
Orambhaga. There are extracts
available from a Stºtravrtti called
Bhgavrtti which is ascribed to
Bhartrhari, but, which is evident
ly written by a later writer
( विमलमति according to some scho-
lars) as there are found verses from
Bhravi and Magha quoted in it as
noticed by Siradeva in his vrtti on
Pari.76. Glosses based upon Panini
Stras, but having a topical arran-
gement are also available, the
famous ones among these being
the Prakriyakaumud by Rarma-
candra Sesa and the Siddhanta-
kaumud by Bhattoj Dºksita. The
मध्यमक्रीमुदी and the लघुकौमुदी can also
be noted here although they are
the abridgments of the Siddhanta
Kaumudi. There are Vrttis in
other languages also, written in
modern times, out of which those
written by Bhtlingk, Basu and
Renou are well-known.
पाणिनीयशिक्षा a short work on phone-
tics which is taken as a Vedanga
work and believed to have been
written by Panini. Some say that
the work was written by Pifgala.
पाणिनीयशिक्षाटीका name of a commen-
tary on the Siks of Panini by
घरणीघर as ordered by king उत्पलसिंहृ.
पातञ्जलमदृभाष्य the same as महृाभाष्य.
See मह्याभाष्य.
पात्रेसमितादि a class of irregular com-
pound words headed by the com-

पाद
232
पारिशेष्य ，
pound word पात्रेसमित, whichare
faken correct as they are This
class of words consists mostly of
words forming a tatpurusa com-
pound which cannot be explained
by regular rules. The class is
called आकृतिगण and hence similar
irregular words are included in it:
e. g. पात्रेसमिता:, गेहंढर: कूपमण्ड्क: etc
cf. KS. on P. II.1.48.
पाद् lit. foot; the term is applied to a
fourth part of a section such as
अध्याय, or of a verse which is divisi-
ble into four parts or lines; cf
प्रवृत्यान्त:पादमव्य्पेर P. VI.1.115, also
गे: पादान्ते P. WHI. 1.57.
पाद्पूरण completion of the fourth part
or Pada of a stan2a or verse: cf.
सोचि लेपे चेत् पादपूरणम् P. VI.1.134,
also प्रसमुपोदः पादपूरणे VIII. 1.6. As
many times some particles, not
with any specific or required sense,
were used for the completion of a
Pada, such particles were called
: cf. सत्त्वाभिधायकं नाम निपातः
पादपूरण: R.Pr.XII.7; also निपातस्त्वर्थी-
संभवै पादपूरणे भवति V. Pr. VIII.50
Uvvata.
पामादि a class of words headed by
the word पामन् to which the tad.
affix न is added optionally with मतुप्
in the sense of *possession', e. g.
पामनः, पामवान् ; बामन:, वामवान् etc.: cf.
K8. on V.2.100.
पायगुण्ड, पायगुण्डे A learned pupil of
Nagesabhatta who lived in Vara-
nas in the latter half of the 18th
century A.D. He was a renowned
teacher of Grammar and is believ-
ed to have written commentaries
on many works of NageSa, the
famous among which are the
*KSika called also *Gada' on the
Paribhasendusekhara,the*Cidasthi-
mala on the Laghusabdendusek-
hara and the *Chaya on the Udd-
yota Balambhatta Pyagunde, who
पारस्कराद्गण or
has written a commentary on the
Mitksar (the famous commen-
tary on the Yajfiavalkyasmrti), is
believed by some as the same as
Vaidyanatha : while others say that
Balambhatta was the son of
Vaidyanatha.
पारण the same as पारायण, recital of the
Veda in any of the various artifi-
cial ways prescribed, such as
krama, jat,.ghana etc.: cf ऋत न
च द्वपदसंहृितास्वरौ प्रसिध्यतः पारणकर्म चोत्तमम्
R.Pr.KI.37.
पारस्करप्रभृति, words
headed by the word पारस्कर which
have got some irregularity, espe-
cially the insertion of सु between
the constituent words. For details
see पारस्करप्रभृतीनि च संज्ञायाम् P. VI.
1.153 and the commentary there-
0f1.
पारायण oral recital of a sacred work.
See प्रारण.
पारथ्ये lit. serving the purpose of
another like the Paribhs and the
Adhikara rules in Grammar which
have got no utility as fair as they
themselves are concerned, but
which are of use in the interpreta-
tion of other rules; cf. अधिकारदाब्देन
पाराथ्यर्थात् परिभाषाप्युच्यते. Par. Sek. Pari.
2, 3.
पारिभाषिक (l) technical, as opposed
to literal; conventional; e. g. the
words संबुद्धि, हेतु etc. cf दादेरर्थाभिधानं
स्वाभाविक्रम् ， न पारिभाषिक्रमद्वाक्यत्वात् !
लोकत एवार्थावगते: | Ks on P. I. 2.56;
cf. क्रिामेदं परिभाषिक्याः संबुद्धप्रेहुणमेकवचनं
संबुद्धिराहृास्विदन्वर्थग्रहृणं संबोधनं संबुद्धिरिति !
M. Bh. on P. I. 2.33; (2) derived
on the strength of a Paribhas
cf. पारिभाषिकं कन्विदनित्यं स्यात् Kat.
Par. vr. Pari. 58.
पारिशेष्य residual nature; the law or
rule of elimination; the remain-
ing alternative after full consi-

पारिषद्
deration of all the other alterna-
tives; cf. विभाषा कुरुयुगन्धराभ्याम् |
पारिशेष्याद्युगन्धरार्था विभाषा > Ks. on P.
IV. 2.180; cf. also पारिशेष्याद्जन्तादेव
यत् सिद्धः Sira. Pari. 37.
पार्षद् it. belonging to the assem-
bly; the term पारिषद refers to the
results of the discussions held at
the assemblies of specially
prominent scholars or learned
persons ; cf. सवैचदपारिषदं हृीदं दास्त्र
(ब्याकरणम्) तत्र नैकः पन्था: दक्य आस्थातुम् !
M. Bh. on II. 1. 58; VI. 3.14.
पारोक्ष्य remoteness tit. being out of
sight: in grammar, पारोक्ष्य is a con-
dition for the use of the rperfect
tense ( लिट् ). See परोक्ष.
पाषेद् पदि भवं पार्षदम्, lit. the inter-
pretation or thcory discussed and
settled at the assembly of the
learned. The word is used in
the sense of works on Nirukti or
derivation of words as also works
of the type of the Pratisakhyas;
cf. पदप्रकृतीनि सर्वचरणानां पार्षदानि Nir.
I. 17 and the com. of, दुर्गाचार्य: cf.
also पार्षदकृतिरेषा तत्रभवतां नेव लेक्र नान्य-
स्मिन्वेदे अर्धः एकारः अर्धः ओकारो वास्ति M.
Bh. on I. 1. 48: see also pp. 104, !
105 Vol. VII Mahabhasya D. E.
Society's edition. See पारिषद.
पार्षेद्व्याख्या name given to the com-
mentary written by विष्णुमित्र on
the Rk Pritisakhya.
पार्षद्स्त्रवृति name given to the works
of the type of commentaries
written by उबट on the old Pra-
tisakhya books.
पाइादि a class of words headed by
the word पाश to which the taddhita
affix य is added in the sense of
collection; e.g. प्य[, तृण्या, वात्या etc,
cf. Kas. on P. IV. 2.49.
पिङ्गळाचार्य an ancient scholar who is
believed to be the first writer on
30
233
पित्
Prosody, his work being known as
छन्द:इास्त्र of पिङ्गल. Some scholars
believe that he wrote a work on
Phonetics which is now popularly
called पाणिनीयाद्दाक्षा.
पिच्छादिं a class of words headed by
the word पिच्छ to which the
taddhita affix इळ ( इलच् ) is added
optionally with मत् ( मतुप् ), in the
sense of * possessed of'; e.g. पीछल;
पिच्छवान्, उरसिलः उरस्वान् etc.: cf Kas.
om V. 2. 100.
पिञ्ज a tad. affix applied to the
word तिळ in the sense of fruitless,
useless; cf. ति ठान्निष्ठात् पिञ्ज्ञपज्ञौ IV.
2.36 Vrt. 6: cf.also निष्फलस्तत्र :तिल-
पिञ्ज: तिळपेज: | Kas. on P. IV. 2.36.
पिटव् a tad. affix applied to the
word नि in the sense of the depre-
ssion of the nose, the word चि
being substituted for नि; e.g. चिपिट:;
cf. इनच् पिटच् चिक चि च P. V: 2.83
पित्र marked with the mute letter प्र
which is indicative of a grave
accent in the case of affixes
marked with it, as for example,
the affixes तिय् , सिम् and Iमप् ; cf.
अनुदात्तं सुप्पितौ P. III. 1.4. A Sirva-
dhatuka affix, marked with the
mute .consonant पृ, in Pakii's
Grammar has been described as
instrumental in causing many
operations such as (a) the substitu-
tion ofgua; (cf P. VII. 3 84,9l).
(b) the prevention of guna in the
case of a reduplicative syllable
as also in the case of the roots भू
and सू ( cf. P. VII. 3.87, 88 ); (c)
the substitution of Vrddhi, (cf. P.
VII. 3.89, 90 ), (d) the augments
इ and ई in the case of the roots वृद्
and ब्र respectively ( cf. P. VII.
3.92, 93, 94 ), and (e) acute accent
for the vowel preceding the affix
in the case of the roots भ, हृीं,
भू
and others ( cf. P. VI. 1.192 ). A

fपत्करण
234
पुञ्जराज
short vowel (of a root) gets त add-
ed to it when followed by a krt
affix marked with प्र: e. g- र्विजित्य,
प्रकृत्य, etc.: (cf. P. VI. I.7l ).
पित्करण marking an affix with the
mute consonant प् for several
grammatical purposes; see पित: cf-
पित्करणानर्थक्यं चानच्कत्वात् P. III. I. 33
Vart.5. See पित्.
पित्फत a grammatical operation caus-
ed by an affix marked with the
mute consonant प्: cf. यतु खलु भिति
डिस्कृतं प्राना fडति च पित्कृतं केन तन्न स्यात्,
M. Bh, on III. 1.-3 Wart. 7. For
details see पित्.
पित्व the same as पित्करण.
and पित्.
पिपीलिकमध्या, पिपीलिकमध्यमा
given to a star2a of त्रिष्टुप् or जगती
or वृहृती type consisting of three
feet, the middle foot consisting of
six or seven or eight syllables only;
e. g. Rgveda K. 105, 2 and 7;
IX. 10.l, VIII. 46.14; cf. उाणक्
पिपीलिकामध्या हृरीयस्येति दृश्यते R. Pr.
XVI. 25, 28, 36.
पिशेट् [ PISCHELL, RICHARD]
a famous European Grammarian
of the ninetcenth century who
wrote many articles on grammati-
cal subjects and wrote a work en-
titled** Prakrit Grammar. *
पीडन compression; a fault in the
pronunciation of vowels and con- !
sonants caused by the compression )
or contraction ofthe place of utte-
rance: cf. विहारसंहृारयेा्यसिपीडन | स्थान-
करणयेर्विस्तारे व्यासे नाम दीष:, संहृर संक्रावन
पांडनं नाम	R. Pr. XIV. 2; cf. also
व्यञ्जनानामतिप्रयत्नेनेीश्चारणं पडन R. Pr.
XIV. 5.
पील्वादे a class of words headed by
the word प िto which the taddhita
affix कुण ( कुणप्) is added in the
sense of* decoction ' ( पाकि ). e. g.
पलुकुण:: cf. Kas. on P. V.2.24.
See पित्करण
name |
पु short term for the labial consonants
पू, , ,म् and मु as prescribed by
P. I.1.61 e. g. ओः पुयण्ज्यपर (P. VIf.
4.80 ).
पुवद्भाव restoration of the masculine
form in the place of the feminine
one as noticed in compound words,
.formed generally by the Karma-
dharaya and the Bahuvrihi com-
pounds, where the first member is
declinable in all the three genders
e. g. दूर्वजढ:. This restoration t6
the masculine form is also noticed
before the tad. affixes तस्, तर, तम्,
रूप्य, पादा, त्व as also before क्यङ् and
the word मानिन्. For details, see P.
WI, 3.34 to 42 and commentaries
thereon. See also page 334, Vol.
VII of the Patafijala Mahabhsya
D. E. Society's edition.
पुस् masculine: a word used in gra-
mmar in the पुलिङ्ग or the masculine
gender; cf खत्रीपुनपुसंक्रषु Br. Dev. I.
40, cf.also असरूपाणां युवस्थविरस्त्रपुसानां
विशेषश्चाविवक्षित: सामान्यं च विवक्षितम् |
M. Bh. on P. I. 2.68 Vart. 1: cf.
पुरुप्रवाद. and पौरुनानि नामानि.
पुस्क masculine nature, hence mascu-
line gender. The word is generally
found as a part of the word भाषित-
पुरुक which means a word which is
declined in the masculine and the
feminine gender or in the neuter
and the masculine gender in the
same sense. For details see M. Bh,
on P. VI.3.34.
पुऋ the augment प् added to the roots
ऋ, हृी, क्नूय् etc. as also to all roots
ending in अा before the causal
sign णिच् ( इ ); e. g. अर्पयति, हृपयति,
क्नेीपयति, दापयति, etc.: cf. अर्तिह्वीलीरी- '
क्नूयीक्ष्माथ्यातां पुङ्क ण P. VII.3.36.
पुsज्ञराज a famous grammarian of the
12th century who wrote a learned
commentaty on a part of the Waky
apadiya of Bhartrhari in which

पुण्डरीकाक्ष 235
पुरस्तात्
he has quoted passages frorn famous
writers and grammarians such as
भामहृ, कुन्तक, वामन, हृमन्वन्द्र and others.
The name is found written as
पुण्यराज also.
पुण्डरीकाक्ष a grammarian of the four-
teenth century who wrote a com-
mentary named कातन्त्रपरिाईाष्ठटीका on
the कातन्त्रव्याकरण.
पुण्यनन्दन a famous grammarian, who
wrote a grammar work, named
रूपमाला.
पुण्यराज see पुञ्जराज.
पुण्यसुन्दरगाणे ajain grammarian who
has written a commentary work |
on the धातुपाठ ofहृमचन्द्र.
पुत्रट (1) the word पुत्र as given in the
ancient list of masculine words
rāmarked with the mute letter ट् to
signify the addition of the fem.
affix इ ( डीप् ): cf. P. IV.1.15: (2)
the substitute पुत्रट् ( i. e. पुत्री ) for
the word दुहृिवृ optionally prescrib-
ed after the words सूत, उग्र, राज, भोज,
कुल and मरु in the simple sense of
* girl' and not * daughter ' e. g.
राजपुत्री, सूतपुत्री: cf. P.VI.3.70 Vart. 9.
पुनःप्रसङ्गविज्ञान occurrence or possibi-
lity of the application of a preced-
ing grammatical rule or operation
a second time again, after once it
has been set aside by a subsequent
opposing rule or rules in conflict;
cf. पुनःप्रसङ्गविज्ञानात् सिद्धम् Par. Sek.
Pari. 39; cf. M. Bh. on P. I. 4.2
Vart. 7; cf.Balso Puru. Pari. 40.
पुनःप्रसव the same as प्रातप्रसव counter-
exception; cf. Candra,Vyak. VI.4.
49.
पुनरुक्त a passage which is repeated in
the क्रमपाठ and the other Pathas or
recitals; the word is also used in
thesense of the conventional repe-
tition of a word at the end of a
chapter. The word पुनर्वचन is used
also in the same sense; cf. यथोक्तं
पुनरुक्तं त्रिपदप्रभृति त्रिपदप्रभृति । T.Pr.I.6l:
cf. also R. Pr. K.8 and 10.
recital of a word again in
the Krama and other Pathas for a
special purpose, although such a
recital after three times is gener-
ally discouraged; cf. एवमर्थविशेषात्
पुनरुक्तस्य ग्रहणं भवति ... Uv Bhasya on
V. Pr. IV. 177.
पुनर्वेचन use of the same word or
expression, which, if noticed in the
writing of the Sitrakara, is indi-
cative of something in the mind of
the Sutrakra; cf. अणः पुनर्वचनमपवाद-
विषये अनिवृत्त्यर्थम् M. Bh. of P III. 3.
12 Vart.1; cf also पुनर्वचनमनित्यत्वज्ञा-
पनार्थम् | Kas. on P. I. 41"
पुनर्विधान prescribing the same affix
or operation again, which gene-
ally is attended with some pur-
pose: cf. बुल: क्रियार्थोपपदस्य पुनर्विधानं
तृजादप्रतिषेधार्थमे, P.III. 3.10 Vart. I ;
cf. also पुनर्वि ीदध्यर्धपूर्वद्विगेडिङ्क न,
Ks. on P. V.1.57.
पुनक्ति occurrence of the same ope-
ration again after it has once occ-
urred and has been superseded;
cf. अङ्गवृत्ते पुनवृत्तावविधि:, M.Bh. on VI.
4.160;VII. I.30 etc.
पुम् or पुस् masculine. It appears
that both पुम्, and भुस् were current
terms meaning * masculine ' in
ancient days. cf. पुमः खय्यम्पेर P.VIII.
3.12. and पुंसोसुङ्क P. VII. 1.89. Al-
though पुम् is changed to पुस् before
a word beginning with a hard
consonant, still पुस is given as an
independent word derived from the
root पा cf. पातेईम्सुन् Unवdi S IV.
177; cf. also the expressions पुवचन,
पुलिङ्ग and पुयेोग. -
पुरस्तव occurring beforehand, pre-
ceding: cf. पुरस्तादपवादा अनन्तरान् विधीन्
बाघन्ते , नोत्तरान् Par. Sek. Pari. 59,
' also M.[Bh. on VII. 2.100; cf.

पुराण
286
पूजार्थ
also the expression पुरस्तादुपकर्ष which
means the same as अपकर्षे which is
opposed to अनुवृति.
पुराण old; the word is used in the
sense of old or ancient cf. पुराणप्रोकेषु
ब्राह्मणकल्पेषु. P. IV. 3.105. It is also
used in the sense of old mytho-
logical works; cf. इतिहृास: पुराणं वैद्यकं
M.Bh. on Ahnika l Wart. 5.
पुरुष a grammatical term in the
sense of *person:' cf. करोतिः पचांदीनां
सर्वान् क्लान् सर्वान् पुरुषान्सर्वाणि वचनान्यनु-
वर्तत, भवति: पुनर्वर्तमानकालं चैकत्वं च,
These persons or Purusas are
described to be three प्रथम, मध्यम and
उत्तम corresponding to the third
second and first persons respec-
tively in English Grammar; cf.
also Nir. WIH. l and 2.
प्र name of a commentary
on the Sarasvatikanthabharana
of Bhoja by KrshalilSukamuni.
पुरुषसंज्ञा the term पुरुष or person vi2.
the first, the second and the
third; the rule prescribing the
term पुरुष is तिडस्त्रीणि त्रीणि प्रथममध्यमी-
तम: P. I. 4. 101: cf. परस्मैपदसंज्ञां
पुरुषसंज्ञा बाधेत M. Bh. on P. I. 4. 1
Vart. 8. -
पुरुषोत्तमदेव a famous grammarian
believed to have been a Buddhist,
who flourished in the reign of
Laksmanasena in the latter half
of the twelfth century in Bengal.
Many works on grammar are
ascribed to him, the : prominent
ones among which are the Bh-
savrtti and the Paribhasvg tti,
the Ganavrtti and the Japaka-
samuccaya and a commentary on
the Mahabhasya called Prna-
paa of which only a fragment
is available. Besides these works
on grammar, he has written some
}ccographical works of which |
Haravali, Trikndasesa, Dvirupa- |
koa, and Ekksarakosa are ha
prominent ones. The Bhasvrtti
has got a lucid commentary on it
written by Srsidhara
पुरुषोत्तमविद्यावागीशा a famous gram.
marian of Bengal, who wrote the
grammar work Prayogaratnamala
in the fifteenth century. The work
betrays a deep study and scholar-
ship of the writer in the Man-
trasāstra.
_K
दि a class of words headed
by the word पुरोहित to which the
taddhita affix यक् is added in the
sense of " duly ' or *nature': e. .
पेरेहृित्य , राज्यम् , बाल्यम् , मान्द्यम् etc.;
cf. KS. on P. V. !. 128.
पुषदि a class of roots headed by the
root पुब् of the four th conjugation
whose peculiarity is the substitu-
tion of the aorist sign अ ( अङ्क )
for ळि: e.. g. अपुत्, अशुषत्, अनुपेत्
gtc. cf. पुषादिद्युताद्य्लदितः परस्मैपदेषु P.
III. 1.55.
पुष्करण a popular term used for the
treatise on grammar by an ancient
grammarian Apsali. cf. अापइालं
पुष्करणम् Ks on P. IV. 3. 15. It
was called Puskarana probably
because it was very extensive and
widely read before Panini. For
the reading दुष्करण for पुष्करण, and
other details see Mahabhasya Vol.
VII. pp. 132-133, D. E. Society's
edition.
पुष्करादि a class of words headed by
the word पुष्कर, to which the tadd-
hita affix इन् ( इनि ) is added pro-
vided the word ending with the
affix forms the name of a district.
e. g. पुष्करिणीं, पद्मिनीं etc. cf. Ks. om
P. V. 2.135.
पूजाथे lit for the sake of paying
respect. The word is used by
commentators in connection with
references to ancient grammarians

पूज्यपाद
by Panini in his sutras, where the
commentators usually say that the
sitras citing the views of ancient
grammarians imply merely an
option, the name being quoted
merely to show respect to the
grammarian: cf. अापिशालग्रहणं पूजार्थम्
S.K. on P.VI.1.92.
पूज्यपाद originally a title, but mostly
used in connection with the famous
Jain. grammarian देवनन्दिन् whose |
work on grammar called जैनेन्द्र-
व्याकरण is well-known: see देवनन्दिन्.
प्रण an ordinal numeral: lit. the
word means completion of a
particular number ( संख्या ): cf. यन
संख्या संख्यानं पूर्यते संपद्यते स तस्याः पूरणः |
एकादंदानां पूरणः एकाददा: | Kas, onP.V.
2.48. The word is used also in the
sense of an affix by the applica-
tion of which the particular
number ( संख्या ) referring to an
object, is shown as complete; cf.
यरिमलुप्संजाते अन्या संख्या संपद्यते स
प्रत्ययार्थ: Kas. on P. V.2.48. These
Purana pratyayas are given in
P. V. 2. 48-58, cf. पूरणं नामार्थः |
तमाहृ तीयाव्दः | अतः पूरणम् M. Bh. on
P.II.2.3. The word also means 'an
ordinal number'; cf. पूरणगुणसुहृितार्थ-
सद्ययतब्यसमानाधिकरणेन P.II.2.11.
पूरणप्रत्यय a tad. affix showing the
completion of the particular
number ( संख्या ) shown by the
word to which the affix is applied;
cf. . अर्धपूर्वपदश्च पूरणप्रत्ययान्तः संख्याशब्दं
भवतीति वेक्तव्यम् अर्धपञ्चमः	M. Bh.on
P.I.1.23 Wart. 7. These affixes are
mentioned by Panini in V.2. 48 to
58.
पूरणान्त ending with an ordinal affix:
the same as पूरणप्रत्ययान्त; cf. योसौ
पूर्णान्तात् स्वार्थ अन् सेपि पूरणमेव M.Bh.on
P. II. 2.3.
पूर्वे (l) ancient, old: (2) belonging
237
पूर्वनिपात
is frequently used as qualifying the
word अाचार्य where it means ancient.
पूर्वेत्रासेद्धवचन the dictum of Panini
about rules in his second, third
and fourth guarters (Padas) of
the eighth Adhyya being invalid
to (viz. not seen by) all the previ-
ous rules in the first seven chapters
and the first quarter of the eighth
as laid down by him in the rule
पूर्वत्रासिद्धम् VIII.2.1. The rule पूर्व-
त्रासिद्धम् is taken also as a governing
rule i.e. अधिकार laying down that
in the last three quarters also of
his grammar, a subsequent rule is
invalid to the preceding rule. The
purpose of this dictum is to prohi-
bit the application of the rules in
the last three quarters as also that
of a subsequent rule in the last
three quarters, before all such
preceding rules, as are applicable
in the formation of a word, have
been given effect to; cf. एवमिहृपि
पर्वेत्रासिद्धवचनं अादेशलक्षणप्रतिषेधार्थमुत्सर्ग-
लक्षणभावार्थं च M.Bh. on P. VIII.2.1
Vart. 8.
पूर्वत्रासिद्धेश्य an operation prescribed
in the province of the rule पूर्वेत्रा-
सिद्धम् i.e. in the last three guarters
of the eighth book of Panini's
grammar.
पूर्वेनिघात the grave accent for the
preceding acute vowel as a result
of the following vowel made acute,
and the preceding , as a result,
turned into grave by virtue of the
rule अनुदात्तं पदमेकवर्जम् VI.1.198: cf.
मतुब्विभक्त्युदात्तत्वं पूर्वनिघातस्यानिमित्तं स्यात् !
अग्निमान् वायुमान् । M. Bh. on P.I.1.39
Wrt. 16.
पूर्वेनिपात placing first (in a compo-
und); priority of a word in a com- '
pound, as in the case of an adjec-
to the Eastern districts. The word
tival word, For special instructions

& 238
पूर्वेपक्ष
पूर्वस्थानिक
in grammar about priority see
P. II.2.30 to 88.
पूर्वेपक्ष j. the view placed first for
हेderation which general is
¶ ¶ of the objector and is
generally refuted by the author's
जैew called उत्तरपक्ष or सिद्धान्त
पूर्वपद् anterior member, the first out
8fuhe two members of a coraPr
und, as contrasted with the next
mghber which is उत्तरपदः 9 पूर्व-
किरषद्कोदः पूर्वपद्यन्तवद्भवति, M
Bh. on P.VI.1.85 Vart, *.
पूर्वपदप्रकृतिस्वर retention of the ori-
ginal acute accent of the first
तैember in a compound as is
generally noticed in the bahuvrihi
compound and in special cases in
othef compounds cf बहुव्रीहौ प्रकृत्या
पूर्वपदम् and the following rules P.
WI. 2.1 to 63.
पूर्वपदार्थप्राधान्य importance in sense
possessed by the first member of a
ompound as noticed generally in
the 6ase of the avyaybhava co?*
pound, which hengel defined as
पूर्वपदार्थप्रधानोव्ययीभावृः M.Bh on P.[].
i.6, II.1.20, II. 1.49.
substitution of the former letter
in the place of the two wi2 the
former and the latter, as a result
of the coalescence of the two cf
अमि पूर्वः and the following rules P.
WI. 1.107-1 10.
पूर्वविध (1) an operation or karya
or the anterior cf. P. I. 1.97: cf
also Mahabhasya om P. I. 1.37 cf
also एकद्रा: पूर्ववेधी स्थानिवत् M.Bh. on
I.2.4 Vart. 2and II. 4.62 Vart-* ;
(2) an operation or a rule cited
देalier in'the order of stras cf
पूविधिमुत्तरो विधिर्वाधते M. Bh on P 1.
1.44 Wart. 13.
प्रतिषेध conflict of two rules
where the preceding rule super- !
sedes the latter rule, as the arrival
at the correct form requires it.
Generally the dictum is that a
subsequent rule should supersede
the preceding one; cf विप्रतिषेधे परं
कार्यम् P. I. 4. 2; but sometimes the
previous rule has to supersede the
subsequent one in spite of the
dictum विप्रतिषेधे परम्. The author of
the Mahabhasya has brought these
cases of the पूर्वविप्रतिषेध, which are,
in fact, numerous, under the rule
विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् by taking the word
पर् in the sense of इष्ट * what is de-
stred ?: cf. इष्टवाची परशब्दः | विप्रातेषेधे
परं यदि तद्भवतीति l M. Bh. on I. 1.3;
I.2, 5: I. 4.2: II.1.69, IV.1.85ctg.
cf.als6 पूर्वविप्रतिषेधो नाम अयं र्विप्रतिषेधे
aरमत्यत्र परईब्दस्य इष्टवाचित्वाच्छब्घ: सूत्रार्थः
adाबार्पण पछते Puru. Pari 108; for
details see page 217 Vol. Wll
Mahabhgya D. E. Society's edi-
tion.
पूर्वसवर्णदीर्ध substitution of the long
rn ºf the previous vowel in th9
place of two vowels as a result 0f
heir coalescence, prescribed by
Pव्रnini in VI. -102 .
पूर्वेस्त्र 1it. previous rule: a rule cited
erlier in a treatise. The word )
however, freguently used in the
Mahabhsya in the sense of.'a
rule 1aid'down by an earlier
grammarian': cf. वहु पूर्वसूत्रे M.
Bh, Ahnika 1, पूर्वसूत्रे गेत्रस्य वृद्धमिति
सुज्ञ क्रियेत M. Bh on I. 2.98; cf.
द्वी6 M.Bh. on P.IV.1.14 Vrtः?
V.168 Vart. 1, VII.1.18, VIII.
4.7.
o _ _
a variety of antaraigatv?
mentioned by Nagcsa in the Pari-
bhagendusekhara, where an oPc**;
tion, affecting a part 9fa word
which precedes that portion of the
् which is affectcd ."
the other operation : looked

पूर्वान्त 239
पेलाद्
upon as antaraiga; e. g- the टिळीप
in स्रजिष्ठ ( खारबन् + इष्ठ ) is looked
upon as अन्तरङ्ग with respect to the
elision of विन् which is बहुिरङ्ग. This
kind of antarangatva is, of course,
not admitted by Nagesa although
mentioned by him: cf. Par. Sek.
Pari. 50,
पूर्वान्त end of the previous. The word !
is used in connection with a vowei
which is substituted for two vowels
( एकादेदा.). Such a substitute is look-
ed upon as the ending vowel of
the preceding word or the initial
vowel of the succeeding word; it
cannot be looked upon as both at
one and the same time; cf.
अन्तादिवच्च P. VI. 1. 85 and उभयत
अाश्रयेण नान्तादिवत् Stra. Pari. 60; cf.
also किं पुनरयं पूर्वान्त: अहोस्वित् पराादे:
अाहेस्विदभक्तः M. Bh. on I. 1. 47
Vrt. 3.
belonging to the previous
vowel in syllabication: e. g. a con-
sonant at the end of a word or
the first in a consonant group
( संयोग ).
name given to the second
pada of the second adhyaya of
Panini's Asadhyay which begins
with the Sitra पूर्वापराधरोत्तरमेकदेशिनैका-
धिकरणे P. II. 2.1.
पृच्फ lit. mixed. The term is used in
the Pratiskhya works in connec-
tion with the vowel ऋ or ल् which
is looked upon as a पृक्तरुवर् being
mixed with the consonant र् or :
cf. पृक्तस्वरो नाम ऋकारः लकारश्च रेफलकारसं-
पृक्तत्वात् com. on T.Pr.XIII.16.
पृथक् separately as far as hearing is
concerned: distinctly separate
from another: cf. सत स्वरा ये यमार्ते
पृथग्वा R. Pr. XIII. 17.
पृथग्योगकरण framing a separate rule
for a thing instead of mentioning
it along with other things in the ]
same context, which implies some
purpose in the mind of the author
such as anuvrtti in subsequent
rules, option, and so on; cf पृथग्थी-
गक्ररणमस्य विधेरनित्यत्वज्ञापनार्थम् Kas. on P.
I.3.7: cf also Kas. on I.3.33, I. 3.
84, I.4.58, III.1.56, IV.1.16, VII.
4.33, VIII.1.52, VIII.1.74.
पृथ्वादि a class of words headed by
the word पृधु to which the taddhita
affix इमन् ( इमानेच् ) is added option-
ally with the other usual affixes
अणु, त्व and त in the sense of
*nature': e. g. प्रथिमा, पार्थवम् , पृथुत्वम् ,
पृधुता: similarly म्रदिमा, मार्दवम् मृदुत्वम्,
मृदुता पटिमा पटिबम् , पटुता पद्धत्वम् ; cf.
KS. om P.V.1.122.
पृथ्वीघराचार्य a grammarian of the
Eastern school who wrote the
treatise कातन्त्रविवरण on Katantra
Grammar.
पृषोदरादि a group of words, with irre-
gularity in the coalescence of the
two constituent members, collect-
ed together by Panini and men-
tioned together with the word
पृषोदर at the head; cf. पृषोदरादीनि
यथेपिादेध्म् P.VI. 3. 109; cf. also
थेषु लेापागेमवर्णावकारः दात्रेण न विहृिताः,
दृश्यन्त च तानि, यथोपदिष्टानि सांधूनि
भ्वन्त | , पृषोदरम् , बलाहकः, जीमूतैः,
पि्राच:, वृसी, मयूर:,पयेोपवसनानाम्, दूय:
etc. Kas. on P.VI. 3.109.
पज tad. affix added to the word तिल
optionally with the affix पिञ्ज: e. g.
तिलपेज:. See पिञ्ज.
पेडुभदृ a grammarian.who has written
a treatise named औणादिकपदार्णव on
the Undi stºtras.
पेलाद् a class of words headed by
the word पैल, the tad. affix in the
sense of युवन् applied to which
(words) is elided; e.g. पैलः पिता, पेल:
पुत्र:: for details see Ks. om P.II.4.
59.

पौनःपुन्य 240 प्रकर्षेण
पौनःपुन्य frequency: repetition a | प्रकम्प् depression of the voice after
sese in which the frequentative
afix यङ्क and in some cases the
imperative mood are prescribed:
cf.ौनःपुन्यं भृशार्थश्च क्रियासुमभिदुर:3. 8.
on P.1II. 1.22: cf. also S. K on
P.III.4.2.
पेारस्त्यवयाकरण a grammarian of the
eastern school which is believed to
have been started by जिनेन्द्रबुद्धि the
writer of the gloss called न्यास on
the Ksikavrtti. The school practi-
cally terminated with पुरुषेत्तमदव and
सीरोदेव at the end of the twelfth
century A.D. Such a school exist-
ed also at the time of Panini and
Patanjali, a reference to which is
found made in प्राचां ष्फ ताद्धत: P. IV.
1.17 and प्राचामवृद्धात्फिन् बहुलम् IV.1.
* 160 and प्राचामुपादेरडज्वुचौ च V.3.80
where the word is explained as
प्राचामाचार्याणां by the writer of the
Kasika.
पौर्वापर्य (1) a relation between two
operations or rules based upon
their anterior and ulterior posi-
tions, which is many times taken
into consideration for deciding
their relative strength; (2) the
order of words; cf इवेदनार्थान्वाच्यान्
दृष्ट्वा बुद्धौ कुर्यात् पौर्वापर्यम् M. Bh.on P.
1.4.109 Vart. 10 cf also पौर्वापर्यमका-
लब्य्पेतं सेहिता, P. I. 4.109 Vart. 8.
पौष्करसादि an ancient grammarian
who belonged to the dynasty of
पुष्करसद्, whose views are quoted by
the Warttikakara and the writers
of the Pratisakhya works: cf न्वये
द्वितीयाः शारि पौष्करसादे: P. VIII. 4.48
Vart. 3; cf. also व्यञ्जनपरः पौष्करसादेर्न
पूर्वश्च ञ्जक्रारम्T. Pr. V: cf. also T. Pr.
XIII. 16; XIV. 2, XVII. 6.
भ a conventional term for हृस्व (short)
generally applied to vowels in the
Jainendra Vyakarana.
raising it as noticed in connection
with the utterance of the svarita
vowels in certain cases and in
certain Vedic schools with a view
to show the swarita nature of the
vowel distinctly, in spite of the
fact that such a depression is
generally looked upon as a.fault:
cf. असन्दिग्धान् स्वरान् ब्रूयादविकृष्टानकेा्पतान्
R. Pr. III.18 as also जात्योभिानाहृतश्चैव
क्षेप्रः प्राश्छट एव च | एत स्वराः प्रकंपन्ते
यत्रेचस्वरितेोदया: R. Pr. III. 19.
भूरण topic; context; a section
wherein a particular subject is
treated; cf. अर्थात् प्रकरणाद्धा लोके कृत्रि-
माकृत्रिमयोः कृत्रिमे संप्रत्यये भवति M.Bh.
on I. 1. 23; cf. also साभान्यशब्दाश्च
नान्तरण विशेषं प्रकरणं वा विक्रिष्ववतिष्ठन्त M.
Bh. on I. 2.43 Vart 9.
प्रकरणग्रन्थ literary works in which the
treatment is given in the form of
topics by arranging the original
stras or rules differently so that
all such rules as relate to a
particular topic are found toge-
ther: the Prakriykaumud, the
Siddhantakumudi and others are
called प्रकरणग्रन्थs. Such works are
generally known by the name
प्राक्रयाग्रन्थ as opposed to वृतिग्रन्थ.
प्रकर्षे eminence: excellence of a parti-
cular quality ; cf. कथं पुनरन्यस्य प्रकर्षेण
अन्यस्य प्रकर्षः स्यात्: cf. also यद्यपि द्रव्यस्य
स्वतः प्रकर्षे नास्ति तथापि गुणाक्रियास्थ: प्रक्रषीं
द्रव्य उपन्वर्यते, Ks on P. V. 4.} 1.
प्रकर्षगति preferential treatment, spe-
cial consideration : cf. तत्र प्रकर्षगतिर्वि-
ज्ञास्यते साधीयः यः अल्विधि: इति, M.Bh.on
P.I. 1.53; cf. also M. Bh. on III.
1.94 Vart. 6.
प्रकर्षेण keeping wide the two parts
of the chin which causes a fault
in pronunciation called धिfट: cf
प्रकर्षणे तदु विटिमाहुः | इन्वी: प्रकर्षणे सर्वे-

पकल्पक 241 प्रकृतिप्रत्ययावभाग
तश्चलने विद्विष्टमसंयुक्तं नाम दोषो भवति ;
Uvvata on R. Pr. XIV.-3.
पकरूपक (fem. प्रक्राळपक्रा ) a word or ex-
pression causing a change in the
nature of another word or ex-
pression which has to be taken as
changed accordingly; cf. प्रकल्पक्र-
मिति चेन्नियमाभावः P. I. 1.68 Vrt. 15:
प्रत्ययविधिरयं न च प्रत्ययविधौ पञ्चम्यः प्रकल्पिक्रा
भवन्ति M.Bh. on P.I.1.27 Vart.1,I.1.
62 Vart.7; II.2.3 Vart.1, IV. 1.60;
cf also रुधादिभ्यः इत्येषा पञ्चमी इप् इति
प्रथमायाः षष्ठीं प्रकल्पयिष्यति, M. Bh. on
II 2.3, Wart. 1, III.1.33.
प्रकल्पक्रिय a word in which a verbal
activity has to be conjectured, as
for example, the words गौः, अश्वः
etc. Words which are not actually
derived by rules of grammar are
called प्रकल्पक्रिय as contrasted with
प्रत्यक्षक्रिय.
भक्|ुर (l) attribute, attribute which
differentiates, manner, difference;
differentiating description: cf. कंाचे-
त्प्रकारं प्रातः इत्थंभूत: K. on P.II.3.2|:
(2) resemblance, similarity of one
thing with another with slight
deficiency: cf. प्रकारे गुणवचनस्य , प्रक्रारी
भद् सादृश्यं च	तदिहु सादृश्ये प्रकुरो गृह्यते |
वर्तमानस्य गुणवृचनटुब्दस्य द्वे भवतः ?
पद्धपद्ध: मृदुमृदुः l अपरिपूर्णगुण इत्यर्थः | परि-
पू न्यूनगुणस्य उपमाने सत्यवं प्रयुज्यते
Kas. on P. VIII.1.12: (%) differen-
tiating attribute; cf. प्रकारवचने थाल्
W. 3.23, प्रकारवचने जातीयर् V. 3.69,
स्यूलादिभ्यः प्रकारवचने कन् V. 4.3 wber8
Kasika defines the word प्रकार as
सामान्यस्य भदको विशेषः प्रकार: Ka, on V.
3.23 and69; (4) type, cf. इतइाब्दः
प्रकारार्थः Kas. on V. 2.93: cf. also
अदिशब्दः प्रकरे Kas. on देवपथाद्यश्च
P..V.3.100; cf also अादिइाब्दः प्रक्ररे
वर्तते | देवदत्तादय आद्याः ।देवदेकात्प्रक्रो
इत्यथै: M.Bh. on I.3.1 Vart. 11.
प्रकाळा Flame of commentary on Bhar-
t्har's Vakyapadya byPujarja.
31 _
प्रकीर्णकाण्ड name given to the thir d
Kanda or book of Bhartrharis
Vakyapadya where miscellaneou s
topics are treated. The third
Knda consists of 14 sections called
by the name Samuddesa. For de-
tails see pp. 381-382 Mahabhasya
Vol. VII. D. E. Society's edition.
प्रछत (1) in context, in guestion; the
word is frequently used in connec-
tion with words in the preceding
rules which are drawn on to the
following rules by anuvrtti or con-
tinuation: cf. प्रकृतं गुणवृद्धिग्रहणमनुवर्तते,
M.Bh. on I.1.3 Wrt. 2ः (2) found
or available in a large quantity:
cf. तत्प्रकृतवचने मयट् | प्राचुर्येण प्रस्तुते
प्रकृतम् [ Kas. on P. V. 4.21.
प्रक्रति (1) material cause: cf.. तद्थे
विकृतः प्रकृती | प्रकृतिरुपादानकारणं तस्यैव
उत्तरमवस्थान्तरे विकृतिः Kas.on P.W.1.12;
(2) original, as opposed to fmodifi-
ed' ( विकृति ): the original base of a
word which is used in language by
the addition of affixes. There are
mentioned three kinds of such
original words in grammar, roots
( धातु ), noun bases ( प्रातिपदिक ) and
affixes (प्रत्यय). प्रकृति is defined as
* इाख्प्रक्रियाब्यवहृ्र प्रकृतिप्रत्ययविभागकल्पनय
इाब्दार्थभावनायां प्रत्ययात् प्रथममुपादानकारणामब
या उपादीयते तां प्रकृतिरिति व्यपदिशन्ति ?
in the Sritgraprakasa: cf. अपदाब्दी
ह्यस्य कृति: । न चापक्राब्द: प्रकृतिः ， न
ह्यपइाब्दे उपदिश्यन्ते न वानुपदिष्टा प्रकृतिरस्ति |
M.Bh. on Siva Stitra 2; cf. also
कृत्प्रकृतिधर्मातु: M.Bh. on P. VI. 2. 139
Vrt. 2; पदप्रकृति: संहिता · पदप्रक्तीनि सर्व-
चरणानां पार्षदानि Nir. I.17.
प्रकृतिनियम restriction regarding the
base, as contrasted with प्रत्ययनियम,
cf. क्रिमये प्रत्ययनियम: प्रकृतिपरः एव प्रत्ययः
प्रयेोक्तव्यः अप्रकृतपरो नति | अार्होस्वित् प्रकृति-
नियमः ， प्रत्ययपरैव प्रकृतिः प्रयेश्ाक्तब्या अपस्यय-
प्ररा नति [ M.Bh. on P.III. 1.2.
प्रकृतिप्रत्ययविभाग division of a word

प्रकृतिप्रत्यापति
42
मक्रियाप्रकाश
(in use in a language) into th9
base and the affix, which is looked
upon as the main function of
grammar.
प्रकृतप्रत्यापति restoration to the ori-
ginal word from the substituted
word: e.g. the restoration of the
' root हृन् inकंसवधमावट कंसे घातयति: cf.
आख्यातेदन्ताण्णिज्वक्तब्यस्तुदाचष्ट इत्यत-
{स्मन्नर्थे | कुढक् प्रकृतिप्रत्यापति: प्रकृतिवच्च कारकं
भवतीति वक्तव्यम्, M.Bh. on III. 1 2
* Vart. 6.
.. < * > _
प्रकृतिभावं phonetical maintenance of
a wording without allowing any
euphonic modifications as found in
the case of a dual form ending in
ई, उ or ए,as also in other specified
, cases; cf. ईदूद्द्द्ववचनं प्रगृह्यम् and the
following rules P. I. 1.11 to 19,
' as also लुतप्रगृह्या अचि नित्यम् WI.1.123.
प्रक्रुतिस्वर the accent i.e. the acute
. accent ( उदात्त ) possessed by the
original word as contrasted with
the accent of the afix ( प्रत्ययस्वर )
which (latter) is iooked upon as
more powerful; cf. (बहुव्रीहृी) पूर्वपदं
प्रकृतेस्वरं भवति M.Bh, on II.1.24, II.
2.29 Vart. 17, See Pahini Stºtras
VI.2.1 to 63.
प्रकृत्यन्तर difference in the radical
base: a different radical base; cf.
' कथमुपबर्हणम् l वृह्निः प्रकृत्यन्तरम् M. Bh.
. on I. ]. 4; cf also प्रत्ययार्थस्याव्यति-
रकात्प्रकृत्यन्तरेषु मन्यामहे धाद्वरव क्रियामाहृति
M.Bh. on P.I. 3.1. _ -
प्रकृत्यर्थनियम restriction regarding the
* sense of the radical base; cf.
प्रकृत्यर्थनियमे अन्येषां प्रत्ययानामभावः | अनुदात्त-
, डितस्तृजादये न प्राप्नुवन्ति M.Bh. onP. I.
, 3.12 Vart. 5. _
.1्छत्यI intact without any change by
rules of euphony, accent etc.:cf.P.
, VI. 2.1 etc. VI.2.137, VI.3.74 aaa
VI,4.163. *
|ृष्ट superior, excellent; cf.मध्यमश्च शु-
इन्दः पूर्वमप्यमर्कट: परमपेक्ष्यं न्यूनः नं वं नैनं:
प्रक्रियाप्रकारा name
प्रवर्तते ; M.Bh. on P. V.3.55 Wart. 3.
प्रक्रम (l) the place of articulation, the
place of the production of sound,
such as throat, chest, palate and
the like; cf. प्रक्रम्यन्ते अस्मिन्वर्णा इति प्रक्रम:
स्थानमुच्यत M. Bh. Pradipa on सिद्धं तु
समानप्रक्रमवचनात् P. I.2.30 Vart. 2; (2)
recital of Veda, described as क्रमपाठ
cf. उभयथा च प्रक्रमे दोषो भवति M.Bh.on
P. VIII. 4.28 cf. also * अय्सु प्रक्रमेषु
देठे भवति ?quoted in the Mahabha
sya on P.VI. 1.172; (3) regularity
in the position of words, regular
order of words.
प्रक्रियाकौमुदी a well-known work on
Sanskrit Grammar by रामचन्द्रशेब of
the 15th century, in which the
subject matter of the eight chapters
of Panini's grammar is arranged
into several different sections form-
ing the different topics of gram-
mar. It is similar to, and possibly.
the predecessor of the Siddhanta
Kaumudi which has a similar
arrangement. The work was very
popular before the Siddhinta
Kaumudi was written. it has got
many commentaries numbering
about a doyen viz. प्रक्रियाप्रसाद,
प्रक्रियाप्रकाइ, प्रक्रियाप्रदीप, अमृतस्तुति,
प्रक्रियाब्याकृति,निर्मलदर्पण,तक्धचन्द्र, प्रक्रियारञ्जन,
प्रक्रियाधिवर्ण and others of which the
Prasda of Vitthalesa and the
Prakasa of Srikrsna are the well-
known ones.
प्रक्रियाकौमुदीवृत्ति called also प्रक्रियाकौ-
मुदीव्याख्या or even कृष्णपण्डिता ( इति )
written by a learncd grammarian
named Krshapangita belonging to
the famous Sesa family of gra-
mmarians.
प्रक्रियाकौमुदींसार a commentary on
Ramacandra's Prakriyakaumud by
a grammarian named Kasinatha
of the learned
commentary on the प्रक्रियाकौमुदी,

प्रक्रियाप्रदीप
243
प्रणयन
called also प्रक्रियाक्रौमुदीप्रक्रान्त, by
Knasesa, the son of Nsirahascs,
which is, in a way an improve-
ment upon the commentary Pra-
sada of Vighalesa.
पक्रियाप्रदीप name of a commentary
on the प्रक्रियाकौमुदी, written by
चक्रपाणिदत्त.
प्रक्रियाप्रसाद् name of the scholarly com-
mentary on Ramacandra's Prakri-
yakaumudi, written by VitthaleSa,
the grandson of Ramacandra.
क्रियासंग्रहृ a work on grammar by
Abhayacandra in which the Stras
of Sakatyana's Sabdnusasana are
arranged in the form of different
sections dealing with the different
' topics of grammar.
गद्य a class of words headed by
the word प्रगदिन् to which the tad.
afix य ( य ) is added in the four
senses prescribed in P. IV.2.67-70;
: e.g. प्रागाद्यम् , शारद्यम् कौविदार्यम् etc.; cf.
KS. on P. IV.2.80. .
पगथ a couple of Vedic hymns
divided into three hymns for pur-
poses of singing as Saman; cf. यत्र
द्वे ऋचौ प्रग्रथनन तिस्रः क्रियन्तं स प्रग्रथनात्
प्रकर्षगानाद्वा प्रगाथ इत्युच्यते Kas.. on P.IV
2.55.
प्रगीत a fault of utterance or recital
, where a simple word in conversa-
, tion or recital is uttered in a tone
proper for singing or in a manner
suitable for singing: cf प्रगीत:
सामबदुचारितः Kaiy. on M.Bh.Ahni.1.
प्रगृहीतlit. held as it is, uncombin-
. able by euphonic rules; the same
as √.
प्रगृहीतपद् a description of the Sarh-
hita text of the Veda in which a
pragrhya vowel preceding another
vowel is held up ( प्रग्ह्य ) i.e. kept
. as it is, without any euphonic
combination; cf. सहृदयास्ताः प्रग्रहीतपदा:
सर्वत्रैव त्र्यक्षरान्तास्तु नैव R. Pr. II. 27.
प्रगृह्य a term used in the Prtisakhya
works and by Prini, in the sense
of a vowel which is not combined
with the following vowel by rules
of euphony: e. g सुजाते अश्वसूनृते, अमी ,
अत्र efc: cf. R. Pr. I. 28 and 29;
P. I. 1.11-19 and VI.1.125.
प्रग्रह absence of euphonic changed the.
term is frequently used in the ;
Taittiriya Pratisakhya; cf T. Pr.
I.60, IV.1.1-54. _
प्रघट्क namegiven to the subdivisions
of chapters or sections in certain
books.
मचय (1) a specific feature or quality
( धर्म ) of the grave (अनुदात्त) accent
when a vowel, accented graye,..is
preceded by a स्वरित (circumflex .
vowel) and is followed upon by
another grave-accented vowel.
These grave vowels in succession,
i.e. the grave vowels which are not
followed by an acute or a cir-
cumflex vowel are uttered neither
distinctly circumflex nor distinctly
grave: cf also R. Pr, III.} -14.
They are uttered like the acute,
but slightly so: e. g.f the vowels.
after म and before ति in इमं म गङ्ग'
यमुने सरस्वति: cf. स्वरितात्संहृितायामनुदात्तानां
प्रवय उदात्तश्रुतिः T. Pr. XXI.10, 11
also cf. P.I.2.39, where the term
एकश्रुति is used for the word प्रचय:
(2) the connection of one word
with many words: e.g. राजे गोश्चाश्वश्च
पुरुषश्च where राज्ञ: is connected with
गौ, अश्व and पुरुष: cfप्रचये समासुप्रतिषेधीं-
बक्तब्य: M. Bh. on II.1.1 Wart, 6.
प्रज्ञादि a class of words headed by the
word प्रज्ञ to which the tad. affix अ*
(अण् ) is added without any change
of sense: e.g. प्राज्ञ:, वाणिज: etc:; 'cf.
प्रज्ञ एय प्राज्ञ: | प्राज्ञी स्त्री . यस्यास्तु श्रेज्ञ
' विद्यते सा प्राज्ञा भवति | Kas. on P.V.
4. 38. ___
प्रपायत composition ( of the original
_

Sitra work): cf. द्वयमपि चैतत् प्रमाणम् |
उभयथा सूत्रप्रणयनात् Kas.on P. IV.2.
117: cf. also Kas. on P.V.1.94 and
V.4.21 .
प्रण्यस्त silent: cf. अनादेशं प्रण्यरुता जिह्वा T.
Pr. II.20 explained by Uvvata as
अनादेशे अनुपद् जिह्वा प्रण्यस्ता तूष्णींभूता भवति
प्रतिकण्ठम् (1) vocally, pronouncedly,
expressly without any attention to
the derivation or the formation of
the word; ( 2 ) irregular forma-
tion: c.. सर्वज्ञास्त्रार्थं प्रातक्रण्ठमुक्तम् where
प्रतिकण्ठ is explained as निपातन by
Uvvata: cf. प्रतिक्रण्टं निपातनम् : उत्सर्गवि-
धिभिः ' साधयितुमशक्या अपि प्रयोगविशेषा
निपात्यन्ते ज्ञाखसंपूर्तये. Uvvata on R. Pr.
[.23.
प्रतिक्रम recital in the reverse order as
in some of the artificial recitations
of the Samhita text such as जटा, घन
etc.
प्रतिजनादि a class of words headed by
the word प्रातजन to which the tad.
affix ईन ( खञ् ) is added in the
sense of good at ( तत्र साधुः ); cf.
प्रतिजन साधुः प्रातिजनीन:, जन जन सेधुरित्यर्थः
Kas. on P. IV.4.99.
प्रतिज्ञा प्रतिज्ञान also; hypothesis, express
tenet in a Sastra or convention: cf.
अाडः स्थः प्रातज्ञान इति वक्तव्यम् | अास्त
सकार्मातष्ठते | आगमौ गुणवृद्धी अतिष्ठते |
विकारौ गुणवृद्धीं आतिष्ठते Mf.Bh. on P.I.3.
22; cf also प्रतिज्ञानुनासिक्याः पाणिनीयाः
K8. on P.I.3.2,VII.1.1, प्रतिज्ञास्वरिताः
पाणिनीया: Kas.on P.I.3.11.
प्रातद्वन्द्वभावेिन् opponent, opposing:
अन्तरङ्गे बहिरङ्गमिति प्रातिद्वन्द्वाभाविंने एतौ
| प्रक्षौ	M.Bh. on P. VIII.3.15.
प्रर्तिनिर्दिश्यमान predicate, as opposed
to the subject cf. उदेद्यप्रातानर्दिश्यमान-
पर्यायेणं तत्ताछङ्गभाक् M.
Bh..Pradipa.
_ knowledge, understanding:
cf. तस्मादनभ्युपायः शब्दानां प्रातपत्तौ प्रतिपदं-
.प्राठःl M.Bh. on Ahn. 1 ; also cf.
MBh. on P. I. 1. 20. Vart.5, I. 1.
244
44,46 etc. _
प्रतिपत्तिगरीयस्त्व difficulty in under-
standing; requiring an effort to
understand the sense; cf. यींगाबभाग
तु प्रतियोगं भिन्नबुद्ध्युदयाद् ब्यक्तं प्रतिपतिगरीय-
स्त्वम् Puru. Pari. 98.
प्रतिपत्तिगौरव difficulty in understand-
ing; requiring a longer time in un-
derstanding the sense: cf. एवं हि प्रति-
पातर्गौरवं स्यात् SIra. Pari. 50. See
प्रतिपत्तिगरीयस्त्व.
प्रतिपत्तिलाघव facility of understand-
ing: cf. प्रातपातलाघवार्थ ज्ञाजनेीज इति
दीघर्वान्तादेज्ञाविधानम् STra. Pari. 91.
प्रतिपद्पाठ (1)recital ofeach and every
word; (2) enumeration of every
word; cf. किं इाब्दकानां प्रतिपत्तौ प्रतिपदपाठः
कर्तव्यः, M. Bh. on Ahn. 1.
प्रतिपदविधान express statement by a
definite wording; cf. एवं तर्हि उभयमनेन
क्रियते अपवादविषये चानिवृत्तिः उत्सर्गविषये व
प्रतिपदविधानम्	M. Bh. on III 3. 12.
Vart.l: cf. also प्रतिपदविधाना च षष्ठी न
समस्तांत ) का पुनः षष्ठी प्रतिपदविधाना का
कृद्यागा । सर्वा षष्ठी प्रतिपदविधाना ईषलक्षणां
वर्जयित्वा " क्रतृकर्मणे: कृति इति या षष्ठी स|
कुधे़गा; M. Bh. on P. II. 2.8 and
II.2.10.
प्रतिपदविधि an injunction or opera-
tion stating expressly the word or
words for which it is meant; cf.
यं विधिं प्रति उपदेशोनर्थकः स विधिर्वाध्यते
दत्वं प्रति नुमः प्रतिपदविधिरनर्थक:, रोः पुनर्नि-
मित्तमेव. M.Bh. on P. VIII. 2.72.
प्रतिपदोक्त expressly stated as opposed
to implied or suggested: cf. लक्षण-
प्रतिपदोक्तयोः प्रतिपदोक्तस्यैव ग्रहुणम्,. Par.
Sek.Pari.105: cf. also विशेषेण प्रतिपादितं
प्रतिपदोक्तं Puru. Pari. 3.
प्रतिप्रसव lit. bringing into life again;
the term is used in the sense of a
counter-exception: cf. याजकादिभिश्चति
पुनः कारकषष्ठीसमासप्रतिप्रसवाद् ब्राह्मणयाजकंीदि-
षु उत्तरपदप्रकृतिस्वर एव	Bhagvrtti on
II.2.16.

प्रतियोगिन्
245
प्रतीतार्थ
}
प्रतियेगिन् negative counterpart:cf न |
चास्तरेण प्रतियेगिन रूपधर्मा भवति M. Bh. on |
II. 1.69. Wart. 6: also M.Bh. G|
VIII. 8.4 Vart. 8 corresponding
term; ct. प्रथमप्रहृणं व तियेोग्यपेक्षत्वाज्ञी-
पयुज्यत Kas. on V. 3.1.
प्रतिरूपक similar in appearance: cf.
उपसर्गविभक्तिस्वरप्रातरूपकाश्रयां निपाता भवन्ति
M. Bh. on P. II. 2.24 Vart. 22, as
also on P. III. 4.2; cf. उपसर्गप्रतिरूपका
निपाता:, तिडन्तप्रातरूपका निपाता:: cf also
अस्ति च समासप्रतिरूपकंी रूढिशाब्दः स्वतन्त्र इति
Nyasa on P. I. 4.54.
प्रतिलीम jit. regressive; a kind of
Sandhi or euphonic combination,
in which the consonant precedes
and the vowel comes after it: e. g.
दृव्यवाडनि:: cf. प्रतिलोमसंधिषु ब्यञ्जनानि पूर्वाणि
रूवरा.उतेर: Uvvata on R. Pr. I. 4.
प्रतिवर्ण for every letter; corresponding
to every letter: cf. अनर्थक्रांतु वर्णाः
प्रतिवर्णमर्थानुपलब्धेः M. Bh. on Ahnika
2, Siva suitra 5.
प्रतिविधान counteraction; solving a
difficulty by taking the necessary
action; cf. अयमिदानीं स प्रतिविंधानकालः
M. Bh. on P. V1I. 4.60 Vart. 4: |
cf. also तत्र प्रातविधानं द्विर्वचननिमित्त
अन्वीत्युच्यत, Kas. on P. VI. 1.2: cf. |
also the usual expression प्रातावधेयं
दोषेषु M. Bh. on I. 1.39, I. 3.10,
4.1.l etc,
प्रतिषिद्ध a rule or operation which is
prohibited or prevented from
application by a specific negation
of it by another rule or operation
laid down to prohibit it. Gene-
rally the prohibited rule does not
apply again: cf. सकृद्रतौ विप्रतिषेधे यद्वाधतं
तद्वाधितमेव Par, Sek.Pari. 40; cf.नेीत्सहृत
प्रातषिद्धा सती बाधितुम् | M.Bh. on P. I.
1.43. The word प्रातषिद्ध which is
generally used in ancient works
appears to be an earlier word as ]
compared with निषिद्ध which is used |
by later grammarians.
प्रतिषेध prohibition, negation, prohibi-
tion of a rule or operation:
generaliy प्रातषेध or प्रसज्यप्रतिषेध is laid
down by the use of the negative
particle ( नञ् ) connected with a
verbal activity, and not with a
noun in a compound in which
case the negation is named पयुदास;
cf. प्रसज्यप्रतिषेधो य: क्रियया सह यत्र नञ् !
पयुदासः स विज्ञय: थत्रोत्तरपदेन नञ् !
प्रतिषघक a wordexpressing a prohibi-
tion, e. g. the megative particle न
(नञ्ज): cf. नति प्रतिषेधक्र: T. Pr.XXII.8.
प्रतिषेधबलीयस्त्व the priority of consi-
deration given to rules laying
down a prohibition, for instance,
the prohibition ofguna or vrddhi
by the rule ङ्किति च P. I. 1.5 after
giving due consideration to which,
the injunctions i. e the guna and
vidhi rules are to be applied; cf.
निषधाश्व बलीयांस: Par. Sek. Pari. 112;
cf. also. एवमप्युभयेी: साबकाये: प्रति-
षेधबलीयस्त्वात्प्रतिषेधः प्राप्नोति, M.Bh. P. on
III. 1.30.
प्रतिषध्य what is prohibited, as oppos-
ed to विधय :cf. औत्त्वं च प्रतिषेध्येम् ;
M.Bh. on P. I. 1.47, I.1.51.
प्रतिसंस्करण editing with improve-
ment, with an attempt to restore
the correct version or the original
text in the place of the corrupt
one sometimes suitable additions
and improvements are also made;
e. g. चरकप्रातसंस्करण attributed to
Patafijali.
प्रतिहार excessive contact with the
sound-producing organ which is
looked upon as a fault: cf. वगेषु
जिह्वाप्रथनं चतुषु ग्रासे मुख्य प्रतिहारश्चतुर्थ ;
चतुर्थ वर्ग ( तवर्ग ) प्रतिहारः अतिप्रयत्नो नाम
देषीभवति Uvvata on R. Pr.xIV.7.
प्रतीतार्थे whose sense is clear and
which hence does not require any
further explanation; cf. यथा वापि
प्रतीतार्थानि स्युरूतयैनान्याचक्षीरन् ] Nir. I.13.

246 प्रत्ययविधि
according to the maxim सर्वे गत्यथ
प्रवृण्ण
प्रतृण्ण lit. broken or split up; the
प्रत्यय
separated words of the Sarhhit of
the Vedas i. e. the Padaptha; the
recitation of the Padaptha.: cf.
ज्ञौद्धाक्षरोच्चारणे च प्रवृण्णम् R. Pr. I. 3.
प्रत्यक्षक्रिय a word in which the verbal
activity is actually noticed, as for
instance, verbs and k t formations;
the term is used as an antonym of
प्रकरूपाक्रय.
affix, suffix, a termination,
as contrasted with प्रकृति the base;
cf. प्रत्याय्यते अर्थ: अनन इति प्रत्यय:; cf. also
अर्थे संप्रत्याययति स प्रत्ययः M.Bh. on III.
1.l Wart. 8; The word प्रत्यय is used
in the PrtiSikhya works in the
sense of * following ? or *that which
follows', e. g. रुपई चेषः प्रत्यये पूर्वपद्य:
R. Pr. I. 30 which is explained
by Uvvata as उष: इत्यये ( इाब्दः )
पूर्वपदावयवः सन् स्पर्श प्रत्यय परभुङ्क्ते इति यावत्:
रेसंज्ञी भवति: Uvvata on R. Pr. I.30;
cf. प्रत्यति पश्चादागच्छतं इति प्रत्ययः परः T.
Pr. V. 7; cf also V. Pr, III. 8.
Pratyaya or the suffix is generally
placed after the base; cfः प्रत्ययः,
परश्च P. III. ]. 1,2; but sometimes
it is placed before the base; e. g.
बहुण्डः:cf. विभाषा सुपो बहुच् पुरस्तातु P.
V. 3.68. The conjugational signs
( ्प् , क्रियन् etc.), the signs of tenses
and moods ( चिल, सिव् , स्य, ताम् etc.)
and the compound endings(समासान्त)
are all called pratyayas according
＾ fo Panini's grammar, as they are
all given in the jurisdiction(अधिक्रार)
of the rule प्रत्ययः III.1.1, which
extends upto the end of the fifth
chapter ( अध्याय ). There are six
main kinds of affixes given in
grammar सुप्प्रत्यय, तिङ्प्रत्यय, कृत्प्रत्यय ,
तद्धितप्रत्यय,.घातुप्रत्यय (e.g. in the roots
चिक्रीर्ष, क्रण्ड्य etc.) and स्त्रीप्रत्यय. The
word प्रत्यय is used in the sense of
realization, in which case the root
इ in the word त्यय meansknowing' |
ज्ञानार्थाः: cf. मन्त्रार्थप्रस्ययाय Nir. I.15.
प्रत्ययग्रहणपरिभाषायां the guiding rule
that when an affix ( स्ययं ) is
given in a rule as a निमित्त (causing
something), the affix denotes a
word-form which begins with that
to which that affix has been added
and ends with the affix itself cf.
प्रत्ययग्रहणे यस्मात् स विहितस्तदादेस्तदन्तस्य च
ग्रह्यणम् Par. Sek, Pari. 23. The rule
यञ्जियेीश्च, which prescribes the affix
फक् (आयन),has the word यञ् and इञ्
which respectively mean यञ्जन्त and
इञ्जन्त; in the word परमगाग्र्यायण froin
परमगाग्र्य the word गाग्र्य is looked
upon as यञ्जन्त to which फक् (अायन) is
affixed and hence the word परमगाग्र्या-
यण is arrived at and not पारमगाग्र्य.
प्रत्ययधातु a term applied to secondary
roots which are formed by adding
affixes like णिच् , सन् , यङ्ग् etc. to
. primary roots or by the addition
ofaffixes like किप्, क्यच् , कायच् etc.
to nouns; e. g. कामय, ह्यारय, चिकीर्ष,
जिर्हीर्ष, जेग्रीय,चक्रीय, गङ्गीय, राजाय, पुत्रकाम्य्
etc.: cf. सनाद्यन्ता धातव: P.1II.. 1.32;
cf also प्रत्ययधातु , गेीपायति, धूपायति,
क्रतीयते M. Bh. on VI. 1.162 Vrt.3.
प्रत्ययपाद a conventional name given
to the first pada of the third
adhyaya of Pinis Asवdhyay
which begins with the rule प्रत्यय:
III. 1.1.
प्रत्ययलक्षण an operation caused by am
affix which takes place even though
the affix is elided: e.g. the term षद
is applied to अनिावत्, सेीमसुत् etc.
on account of the words ending
with a case affix although the
affix of the nom. sing. has been
elided: cf. प्रत्ययलोपे प्रत्ययलक्षणम्. P.I.1.
62 and Kas, thereon. ___
प्रत्ययविधि a rule prescribing the addi-
, tion of a suffix; cf. यस्मात्प्रत्ययावेधि-
स्तददि त ययङ्गम्, P.I.3.13.

प्रत्ययंस्वरे
247
प्रत्यासत्ति
प्रत्ययस्वर an accent caused by virtue
of the affix which is added; cf.
यथैव हि निपातनस्वरः प्रकृतिस्वरं बाधत एवं
प्रत्ययस्वरमपि वधत ं उतिझिटत्वाप्रत्थयस्वरो
भबिक्यति | M. Bh. on P. I.I 56 Vart.
23.
प्रत्ययान्त ( प्रकृति ) a base ending in an
affix, a secondary base as opposed
to the original base, which is des-
cribed to be of six kinds. सुप्प्रत्ययान्ता
(प्रकृतिः) as in अहंयुः, सायेतनम् etc.;
तिङ्प्रत्ययान्ता as in पचातितराम् , आस्तिक:,
पन्वतभृज्ञता etc.: कृत्प्रत्ययान्ता as in कृत्रिमम्
सांराविणम् etc.; ताद्धतप्रत्ययान्ता as in
गाग्र्यायणः, तत्रत्यः etc.: धातुसंज्ञाप्रत्ययान्ता as
in चिकीर्षा, क्रण्ड्या etc.: स्त्रीप्रत्ययान्ता as in
गङ्गय:, गौरेय:, काद्रवेय: etc.
the meaning of an affix.
Generally meanings are assigned
to affixes when they are prescribed.
When the meanings are not assign-
ed, the affix is supposed to bear
the sense of the base: cf. अनिर्दिष्टाथ:
प्रत्ययाः स्वार्थे Par. Sek. on Pari. 113.
The sense given by a word in
language is the composite sense of
the base and the affix together cf.
प्रकृतिप्रत्ययैः सहार्थं ब्रूतः , न केवला प्रकृतिः
प्रयोक्तव्या, न केवलः प्रत्यय: ， M. Bh. on
P.I.2.64 Vart. 5.
प्रत्यवमर्श reference (made to some-
thing) by a word , cf. ताभ्यामंति
संप्रदानेथे प्रत्यवमर्शः Ks.on P. III.4.75;
[ cf.also तज्ञाामकाभ्य इति सर्वनाम्नां प्रत्ययप्रकृतेः
प्रत्यबमई: K. on P.IV.1.113.
प्रत्याख्यान rejection of a rule or a
word or words in a rule shown as
redundant, their purpose being
shown as served otherwise: cf. लुपि
युक्तवद् व्यक्तिवचने इति पूर्वाचार्याणामवेदं सूत्रम् |
तथा चास्य प्रत्याख्यानं भविष्यति " तदशिष्यं
संज्ञाप्रमाणत्वादिति | Kas. on I.2.51.
प्रत्याख्यानपक्ष an alternative which
proposes the rejection of something
such as a rule or its part: cf. यदि
प्रत्याख्यान प्रक्ष: इदमपि प्रत्याख्याते M. Bh.
on Siva Stra 4; cf also अदीबयुरित
पदकारस्च प्रत्याख्यानपक्ष उदाहृरणमुपपन्नं भवति
Vydi Pari. 42.
प्रत्याख्यानवादिन् one who advocates the
rejection of something, an oppo-
nent, an objector; cf प्रत्याख्यानवादं
अाहृ-नास्त्यत्र विशेष इति Kaiy. on M. Bh.
on P. VI.4.22 Vart. 15.
प्रत्यादान lit. taking again; uttering a
word already utttered in the
Krama and other recitations of
the Vedas; cf. क्रमे द्वाभ्यामतिक्रम्य प्रत्या-
दाथोत्तरं तये: | प्रत्यादाय पुनर्यहृत्वा Uvvata
on R. Pr. X-1.
प्रत्यापत्ति restitution, restoration to the
previous wording: cf. प्रातिपदिकस्य च
प्रत्यापत्तिर्वेक्तव्या M. Bh. on P. VI.3.34
Vart.2; restoration to the previous
nature: cf. अकारस्य प्रत्यापतै दुर्धप्रातिषेधः ;
खट्वा,माला ! M.Bh. on P. VIII.4.68.
मत्याम्नाय literally, repetition in a con-
trary way; in the Pratisakhya
literature, the word refers to the
repetition of a Vedic passage;
repetition by pupils after hearing
from the preceptor : cf. प्रत्याम्नाय:
पुनर्वचनं Uvvata on R. Pr. XV. 9.
प्रत्यारम्भ: (1) statement after prohibi-
tion lit. commencing againg in-
ducing a person to do something
after he has refused to do it by
repeating the order or request for
generally by beginning the appeal
with the word नहृ: e.g. नह्य भेीक्ष्यसे ? नहु
अध्येप्यसे: cf. नह्य प्रत्यारम्भे P. VIII. 1.31
and Kasik and Nyāsa thereon.
(2) commencement or laying down
again in spite of previous mention;
cf. इषवचनातु योसौ प्रत्यारम्भात्कृतो बहुव्रीहिः
M. Bh. on P. VI-3.46.
त्यस्लङ्ग close contact or association;
तरतमयेाश्च अति्थे अदक्षिणप्रत्यासङ्ग ， प्रत्यासङ्ग:
प्रत्यासन्नता V. Pr. V. 2.
प्रत्यासात immediate proximity: close
contact; the same as प्रत्यासङ्ग which

प्रत्यासत्तिन्याय
248
प्रथम
see above: cf. हेतुमण्णिचो विधिः प्रतिषेधोपि
प्रत्यासतस्तस्यैव न्याय्य: Kas. on P. I 3.88.
cf also Kas. on WII.1.95.
प्रत्यासत्तिन्याय or प्रत्यासतिवचन a dictum
that a word should, as fair as possi-
ble, be construed with the nearest
word: cf. अनन्तरस्य विधिः प्रतिषेधो वेत्यर्थ:
प्रतिपत्तिन्यायलभ्य: Sira. Pari. 48.
प्रत्याहृार lit. bringing together; bring-
ing together of several letters ( or
words in a few cases, such as roots
or nouns ) by mentioning the first
and the last only for the sake of
brevity; the term प्रत्याहारं is gene-
rally used in connection with brief
terms such as अण्, अक् , अच् , हृल् and
the like, created by Panini in his
grammar by taking any particular
letter and associating it with any
mute final letter ( अनुबन्ध ) of the
fourteen Sivasutras, with a view to
include all letters beginning with
the letter uttered and ending with
the letter which precedes the
( mute ) letter. The practice of
using such abbreviations was in
existence before Panini, possibly in
the grammar attributed to Indra.
The term प्रत्याहृार is not actually us-
ed by Panini; it is found in the Rk.
Tantra; cf. प्रत्याहृारार्थं वर्णानुबन्धे व्यञ्जनम्
R.T.I.3. The term appears to have
come into use after Panini. Panini
has not given any definition of
the term प्रत्याहृार. He has simply
given the method of forming
the Pratyaharas and he has
profusely used them: cf. आदिरन्त्यन
सहेता P. I. 1.7I. The word कुञ्
in P. III.1.40 and तृन् in P. II.
3.69 are used as Pratyaharas. For
a list of the Pratyharas which
are used by Panini see Ksik on
the Maheswara Sutras.
मत्याद्यारस्त्र a term for the fourteen
Siva Stras which are utilized for
the formation of Pratyaharas.
प्रत्याहृारसूत्रत्रिबार a short treatise ex-
plaining the pratyhras अणु , अट्,
अद् etc. in the grammar of Panini;
one such work is written by a sou-
thern grammarian named तिमण्णा.
प्रत्याहाराह्निक name given to the second
Ahnika of the Mahabhasya which
explains the Siva Stºtras अइउणु,
क्रलक् , etc., and hence naturally dis-
cusses the Pratyahras.
श्रत्युचार repetition especially of what
has been recited by the preceptor
cf. प्रत्युचायैतद्वचनं परस्य शिष्यस्य स्थाद् भे इति
चोदना वा, R. Pr. XV. 8.
प्रत्युज्जीवन bringing to life again; the
term is used in the sense of प्रतिप्रसव
or counter exception.
प्रयुद्ादृग्ण counter instance. In
order to explain the wording of
a grammatical rule clearly, it is
customary to give along with the ;
instances of the rule (where the
rule has been effectively employ-
ed), a few words which would
have resulted into other faulty
words by the application of the
particular rule in case that rule
had not been stated or a word or
more of it had been omitted: cf.
न केवलानि चर्चापदानि व्याख्यानं वृद्धः आत्
पेच् इति ， किं तर्हि ` उदाहृरणं प्रत्युदाहरणं
वाक्याध्याहृार: इत्येतत् समुदितं व्याख्यानं
भवति ! M. Bh. in Ahnika 1.
प्रथम lit, premier, first; the word is
used in connection with the per-
sonal affixes तिपू , तस्, इि ( अन्ति ) of
verbal forms. See the word पुरुष
above: cf. अस्तिर्भवन्तीपरः प्रथमपुरुषः अप्रयु-
ज्यमानेप्यरुतेति | वृक्षः प्लक्ष: | M. Bh.
on P. II. 3.1 and 4. The word
प्रथम is used in the Prtisakhya
works in the sense of the first
consonants of the five vargas or
groups of consonants; cf. प्रथमेद्विती-
यास्तृतीयैश्चतुर्थाः V. Pr. IV. 1 10 cf.
प्रथमतृतीयादीनामार्द्रादित्वादेत्वाभावः, M.Bh.

प्रथमा
249
प्रधान|ृष्ट
on P. VI. 4.120 Vart 3, also cf.
Katantra I. 4.1 and Hem. I. 3.35.
The word is also used (in the
feminine gender) in the sense of
the case affixes सु ( सु ), औौ, जम्
( अस् ) of the norminative case.
The word is also used in the
sense of the premier accent उदात्त
(acute ): cf. प्रथमभाविनः उदात्तभाविन:
Uvvata on R. Pr. III. 8.
प्रथम[ the nominative case: case affix-
es of the nominative case. cf.
प्रातिपदिकार्थलिङ्गपरिमाणवचनमात्रे प्रथमा P.II.
3.46.
प्रदईौन illustration; cf. विदांकुर्वन्तु इति |
इतिकरणः पृदृर्शनार्थः न केवलं प्रथमपुरुषबहुवचनं
कं तर्हि सर्वाण्येव लीड्वन्वनान्यनुप्रयुज्यन्त Kas.
on P. III.1.41; cf. also किमथे येोग-
विभाग: ( प्रदर्शनार्थः | Ks on P.I.2.59.
श्रदान mode of articulation, the same
as करण. _
प्रर्दीप popular name of the famous
commentary on the Mahabhasya
ofPatafijali written by the reptt-
ed grammarian Kaiyata in the
eleventh century A. D. The corn-
mentary is a very scholarly and
critical one and really does justice
to the well-known compliment
given to it, viz. that the Pradipa
has kept the Mahabhasya alive
which otherwise would have re-
mained unintelligible and conse-
guently become lost. The commen-
tary प्रदीप is based on the commen-
tary महाभाष्यदीपिका,orप्रदीपिका written
by Bhartrhari, which is available
at present only in a fragmentary
form. The Pradipa is to this day
looked upon as the single com-
mentary on the Mahabhsya in |
spite of the presence ofa few other
commentaries on it which are all
thrown into the back-ground by it. !
प्रदीपकार Kaiyatabhat!a, the author
of the fatmous commentary प्रदीप
32
on the Mahabhasya, which see
above.
प्रदीपबिवरण called also उद्द्योत written
by the well-known grammarian
Nagesabhatta of Varanasi who
flourished in the first half of the
eighteenth century.
प्रदेढा lit. district sphere of applica-
tion, place of the application of
a rule. The word is frequently
used in this sense in the Ksika
Vritti; cf. प्रत्ययप्रदेदा: प्रत्ययलेप प्रत्यय-
लक्षणमित्येवमादयः Kas. on P. III.1.1 .
cf also अनुदात्तप्रददाः अनुदात्तौ सुप्पितौ
इत्यादयः Kas. on P. I. 2.30. The
word प्रदेदा is also used in the sense
of the place of use or utility: cf.
संज्ञाद्यास्त्रस्य तु कार्यकालपक्षे न पृथग्वाक्यार्थेवोधः
किं तु प्रदेद्यावाक्येन सहैव	... कार्यज्ञानं च
प्रदेदाद् एव Par. Sek. Pari. 3.
प्रदेश्ााख a rule, laying down a
positive original injunction as
opposed to the अपवादशींस्र: cf. यैः अर्थौ:
प्रदियन्त तानि प्रदद्यादाख्त्राणि com. on
R. Pr. XI.35.
मान (1) the principal thing as oppo-
sed to the subordinate one: some-
thing which has got an indepen-
dent purpose of its own and is not
meant for another: प्रधानमुपसर्जनमिति
च संबन्धिज्ञाब्दावेतौ M.Bh. om P. I.2.43
V.5: cf. also प्रधानाप्रधानयेः प्रधाने कार्य-
संप्रत्यय: Par. Sek. Pari. 97: (2) pre-
dominant of main importance; cf.
पूर्वपदार्थप्रधानेाव्ययीभावः etc. M. Bh. on
II. 1.6, 20, 49 II.2.6 etc; (3) pri-
mary as opposed to secondary;
cf. गोणे कर्मणि दुह्यादेः प्रधाने नीहृकृष्वृहृाम् |
cf also प्रधानक्रमेण्याख्येय लादीनादुद्विकर्मणाम्
अप्रधाने दुङ्गादीनाम् M.Bh.on I.4.51
प्रधानशिष्ट prominently mentiongd as
opposed to अन्वाचयशिष्ट: cf. कर्तुः क्यङ्क
सलेपश्च प्रधानशिष्ट: क्यद् अन्वाचयशिष्ट:सलेीप:
M. Bh. on III.1. 11; cf. also प्रधान|-
न्बाचयज्ञिष्टयेो: प्रधान सेप्रत्यय: Vyadi Pari.
67.

प्रध्वंसेन्
250
मयोगनियम
प्रध्वंसिन् disappearing: cf. उच्चरितप्रध्र्व-
सिनीनुबन्धाः Vydi Pari. l l.
प्रपञ्च amplification, further expla-
nation,clarification. The expres-
sion पूर्वस्यैवायं प्रपञ्चः or तुल्यैवृर्वं पुपुचःis
very frequently used in the Ksika
vrtti: cf. Kas, on P.II. 1.33,37,41,
58, II.4.28, III.2.6I etc.
प्रपाठक्र a term used for a division of
a work by an ancient writer, as for
instance in the case of the Athar-
vapratisºkhya.
प्रभा (1), name of a commentary on
the Sabdakaustubha by Ragha-
vendracarya Gajendragadkar; (2)
name of a commentary on Kai-
yata's Mahabhsyapradipa.
प्रभाचन्द्र a Jain grammarian who
wrote a learned commentary
named Nyasa on the Amoghvrtti
of Amoghavarsa.
प्रभृति apassage or a word at the com-
mencement: cf. इरार्चतींप्रभृति अा दाधार
T. Pr. IV. 22: श्रुतादिप्रभृतीनि च R.
Pr. X. 4 तिष्ठद्गुप्रभृतीनि च P.II.1.17.
भद् smaller division, sub-division.
प्रमाण (1) authority: authoritative
proof: cf लोक: अवद्ये इदंषु प्रमाणम्
M. Bh. on I. 2.64 Wart. 29; (2)
measurement, measure: cf. प्रमाणे
द्वयसज्दघ्नञ्मात्रचः P. V. 2.37; प्रमाणत:
अकारो गुणः प्राप्तः Kas. on P. I. 1.50.
मम[द् inadvertance, megligence; cf.
प्रमादकृतमाचार्यस्य वाक्यमक्रर्तम् M. Bh. on
P. IV. 2.70: cf also ओन्य तु गौरादि-
ष्वेतयेाः प्रमादपाठमाहुः Kaiy. of P. I.
1.72. Vart, 4.
प्रयतन the same as प्रयत्न: see प्रयत्न.
श्रयत्न (1) effort; the word is used in
connection with the effort made
for producing sound cf. तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं
सवर्णम् P. 1.19 these efforts are
described to be of two kinds बाह्य
and आभ्यन्तर of which the latter
are considered in determining the
cognate nature of letters ( सावण्र्य ):
cf.अाभ्यन्तरप्रयत्नाः सवर्णसंज्ञायामाश्रयन्ते:Kaई,
on P. I. 1.9; (2) specific measure
taken for a particular purpose
such as marking a letter with a
particular tone or accent or
dividing a rule, or laying down
a modificatory rule or the like; cf.
सैवाननुवृत्तिः इदनाख्यायते प्रयत्नाधिक्येन पूर्व-
सुत्रपि संबन्धार्थम् Kas. on P. IV. 3.22.
K
प्रयुक्ताख्यातमञ्जरी a small treatise on
verbal forms by सारङ्गकवि.
प्रयोग (1) employment or use of a
word in language and literature
about which, laying down rules
is looked upon as the purpose of
grammar; cf. प्रयेोगमूलत्वाद् व्याकरणस्मृतेः
Kaiy..on P. V. .1.16, लोकतोर्थप्रयुक्ते
इब्दप्रयेगे इाख्त्रण धर्मानयमे यथा लौकिंक-
वैदिकेषु M. Bh. Ahnika I. Vart. 1;
(2) use of speech; utterance: cf.
मध्यमन स वाक्प्रयोग: प्रणवात्मक: कतैब्यः, T.
Pr. XWIII. 4.
प्रयोगनियम general rules or principles
laid down regarding the use of
words in language and literature
such as (l) a word recognised as
correct should always be u ed, cf.
एवामह्यपि समानायामर्थगतौ शब्देन चापईदिन
च धर्मनियमः क्रियत इबेदनैवार्थाभिधेयो नाप-
इाब्देनेति | एवंक्रियमाणमभ्युदयकारि भवति M.
Bh. on P. I. I. Ahnika l, (2)
never a base alone or an affix
alone should be used, but always
a base with the necessary affix
should be used; cf. यावता समयः कृते
न केवला प्रकृतिः प्रयेोक्तव्या न केवळ: प्रत्यय:
M. Bh, on P. I. 2.64 Vºrt. 8,
also on P. III. 1.94 Vrt. 3; (3)
when the sense is already express-
ed by a word, a word repeating
the sense should not be used; cf.
उक्तार्थानामप्रयेग:. Besides these, many
minor regulations of the type of
Paribhags : are laid down by
grammarians. For details see
Paribhassafngraha Introduction.

प्रयोगपर्व 251
प्रवर्तना
प्रयेोगपळव a small treatise in verses
on the conjugation of roots,
written by Bhavanatha MiSra, son
of Rampati.
मयोगमुखमण्डन known also by the
name प्रयेगविवक्र, an elementary
treatise on syntax, attributed to
वररुचि, who must, of course, have
been different from the ancient
grammarian वररुवि.
मयोगरत्नमाला name of a recognised
treatise on grammar written by
पुरुषेत्तमविद्यावागदि of Bengal in the
fourteenth century. The treatise
explains many words which, al-
though current in language and
literature, cannot be easily formed
by rules of grammar. The author
has tried to form them by apply-
ing rules of grammar given in
the grammatical systems of Panini
and Katantra. The alphabet given
in this treatise is according to the
system of the Tantra Sastra which
shows a scholarship of the author
in that branch The grammar
was studied much in Bengal and
Assam.
प्रयोगविधि an elementary work on
the three constructions which has
no name of the author mentioned.
__ -
प्रयोगविषय sphere or domain of the
use of words; the whole Vedic
and classical recognized litera-
the word is used although rarely,
in the sense of a cause also; cf.
इमान्यस्य प्रयेोजनानि अध्येयं व्याकरणम् M.
Bh. Ahnika 1. For the advan-
tages of the study of Vyakarana,
see M. Bh. Ahnika 1. See also
Vyakarana Mahabhasya Vol. VII
pp.226,227, D.E. Society's edition.
मयोज्य that which is employed or
incited or urged; the word which
is the subject in the primitive con-
struction and becomes an object in
the causal construction, and as a re-
sult, which is put in the accusative
case being मयेज्यकर्म. As, however,
the प्रयोज्यकर्म originally occupies the
place of the subject in the primitive
construction, the term प्रयेज्यक्रर्त
( प्रयेोज्यश्चेसो कती व ) is often uscd in
connection with it, as contrasted
with the term प्रयेोजककत which is
used with respect to the subject in
the causal construction; cf. इहृ च
भदिका देवदत्तस्य यज्ञदत्तस्य काष्ठानामिति प्रयेोज्ये
कर्तरि षष्ठी न प्राप्नोति	M.Bh. on P. III.
1.26 Vart. l ; cf. also Kaiy. on P.
I. 2.65.
प्रवचन (1) recital of Vedic texts; cf.
अथेके प्राहुरनुसंहृितं तत् पारायणे प्रवन्वने प्रज्ञास्तम्
R. Pr. XV. 16; cf also इति प्र बाभ्रव्य
उवाच च्व क्रमे क्रमप्रवक्ता ( बाभ्रव्यः ) प्रथमं
दादंस च, R. Pr. XI. 33; (2) the
reading of the Samhita text पावचनेी
वा यजुषि | प्रवचने भवः स्वरः प्रावचनः ;
प्रवन्वनेद्वाब्देनार्षपीठ उच्यत 1 V. Pr. I. 132.
ture: cf महान् हि शब्दस्य प्रयेश्ागविषयः | | प्रवण circumflex accent; possessed of
सप्तद्वीपा वसुमती त्रयो लोकाः चत्वारो वेदाः
सृङ्गाः सरहस्याः बहुधा विाभन्नाः, एकइ्तमध्व-
युशाखाः, सहृखवत्र्मा सामवेद:, एकर्विज्ञातिधा
बाहृयं, नवघाथर्वणो वेदे वाक्रीवाक्यामातह्यासः
पुराणं वैद्यकमित्येतावाञ्ाब्दस्य प्रयोगविषय: M.
Bh. Ahnika 1. Vrt. 5.
प्रयोजक causing another to do;
causal agent; cf. कुर्वाणं प्रयुङ्क्ते इति
प्रयेीजक्र: Ks. on P. I. 4.55.
मयेर्भाजन object, motive or purpose
in undertaking a particular thing;
svarita accent; cf. सुर्वेः प्रवण इत्येके |
प्रकर्षेण वन्येत ब्युत्क्षिप्यते इति प्रवणः स्वरितखर:
T. Pr. I. 47; cf. also प्रवणे यष्टव्यम् M.
Bh. on VI. 2.33.
_K
प्रवतेर्कोपाध्याय a grammarian who
wrote an explanatory gloss named
कैयटप्रक्राटुक्रा on theमहृाभाष्यप्रदीप written
by Kaiyatabhatta.
न[ incitement or inducement
which is the sense of the *lif'
affixes in general cf प्रवर्तनायां लिङ्क

प्रवाद्
प्रवाद् a grammatical explanation:
detailedexplanation by citing the
gender, number, kt affix, tad.afix
and the like: cf. लिङ्गसंख्यातदुत्तरूप्-
भदः प्रबादाः , पाण्याद्ब्दानां प्रवादषु प्रथमेी
(original) नकारे णत्वमाप्नोति स च प्राकृतः |
T. Pr. XIII. 9. The word is ex-
plained as a change in the forma
6f a word, as for instance, by the
substitution of स् for विसर्ग where
विसर्ग is, in fact, expected gf कबन्धं
पृधु इत्येतेषां पदानां प्रवदा रूपभेदा उदये
परत्रावस्थिता: द्वि इत्येतस्य उपचारं जनयन्ति |
यथा दिवस्क्रबन्धम् , दिवस्पृथ्: Uvvata on
R. Pr. IV. 22: cf. also प्रत्रादाः षडितः
पर, R. Pr. IX. 18. In the Nirukta,
the word is used in the sense of
*distinct mention'; cf. एवमन्यासामपि
देबतानामादित्यप्रवादां: स्तुतये भवन्ति ( dei-
ties are mentioned under the
name of Aditya) Nir II.13; cf also
वैश्वानरीयाः प्रवादाः Nir, VII. 23.
प्रवादिनः scholars who explain the
changes ( प्रवाद ) mentioned above;
possibly the Padakiras or writers
of the पूदपाठ;cf प्रवादिने दूणाशदूरिवदूलभान्
... महुप्रदेशे स्वधितीव चानथदचTR Pr.
KI. 20. Apparently प्रवादिनः ( nom.
sing.) seems to be the word in the
explanation ofUvvata.
विग्रह separate or distinct uterance
of several words of a sentence
which are joined together by Sarh-
dhi rules in a compound ( समास )
or otherwise, with a very short
pause ( अवग्रहृ ) after each word.
e. g. उद् उ एति instead of उद्वति: cf.
पूर्वग्रहेण मृद्ववग्रहेण वर्धयेयुः R. Pr. XV.10,
where Uyvata remarks प्रविग्रहृषु प्रश्र्मःि
विश्लिष्टं कुर्यात् | क्लाधिक्येन कुर्यात् तथा च
उद् उ एति इति पठेन्न तु उद्वति.
प्रविभक्त made separate with their
Component parts shown clearly:
Split up into component parts in
such a way thattheir meaning
also is fully stated cf तद्धितसमासं
252
यष्टि
चेक्रपर्वसु वृनक्रपर्वमु च पूर्वे पूर्वे अपरं अपरं
प्रविभज्य निर्यात् | दण्डयः पुरुषः दण्डमर्हतीति
वा दण्डेन संपद्यते इति वा | Nir.II.2.
प्रवृत्त ( I) complete: cf. अथ य प्रवृत्त अथे
अामृताक्षरेषु ग्रन्थेषु वाक्यपूरणां आगच्छन्ति पदपू-
रणार्ते, Nir. I. 9; (2) which has pre-
Sented itself, which has become
applicable; the word is used in
connection with a grammatical
rule or operation : cf. एवं च कृत्वा
धर्मशास्त्रं प्रवृत्तम् : M. Bh. on P. I. 2.64
Vart.39; समुदाये व्राह्मणढाब्दः प्रवृतेवयवष्वपि
वर्तते जातिहीने गुणहृीने च	M.Bh. on II.
2.6; cf. दर्विस्ये यण् हृस्व इति प्रवृत्तं, M.
Bh. on P. VI.1.77; also cf. यद्यपि
डिचल्ययमपवादः ... तातेड मन्थरं प्रवृत्त: परेण
बाध्यते S. K. on P.VII.1.35.
प्रवृत्ति (l) application or presentation
ofa rule as opposed to निवृात: cf
क्रचित्प्रवृत, कचिदप्रवृतिः कचिद्विभाषे कावद-
न्यदवः (2) working : function; cf. नान्त-
रेण साधन क्रियायाः प्रवृत्तिर्भवति M. Bh. on
P.II.3.7.
प्रवृत्तिनिमित्त cause of the application
of a word which is shown by the
word when the affix त्च orता is
added to it: cf. तस्य भावस्त्वतले | इाब्दस्य
प्रवृत्तिनिमित्तं भावळादेनोच्यते, Kas. on P.W.
' .119. There are given four such
causes जाति, गुण, क्रिया and संज्ञ|. -
प्रवृत्तिभेद् difference regarding the
cause of application cf. पूर्वमिति
वर्तमाने पुनः पूर्वग्रहणं प्रवृत्तिभेदेन नियमेप्रति-
पत्त्यर्थम्: Ks. on P. VI.2:174.
प्रवृद्धादि a class of compound words
headed by the word प्रवृद्ध in which
the second word, which is a past
pass part, has its last vowel
accented acute; cf. प्रवृद्धं यानम्, प्रयुक्ताः
सक्तवः, खट्वारूढः ' आकृतिगणश्च प्रवृद्धादिद्र-
घन्यः तेन पुनरुत्स्यूतं वासे देयमित्यादि सिद्धं
भवति Ka8. on P.VI.2. 147.
श्रश्लिष्ट (l) an additional letter (vowel
or consonant) read on splitting up
a euphonic combination; cf. प्राश्लष्टा.

प्रश्लिष्टनिर्दशा
253
प्रसद्ध
वर्णावेतौ M.Bh.on P.I.1.9 Vrt. 2: (2) ;
contracted combination; name of !
a Sandhi where two vowels coale-
sce into one single vowel, cf. R.Pr. |
II. 15-19.
मालष्टनिदेज्ञा mention ofa thing in a
coalescence, which when split up, !
shows a phonetic element or a !
letter which could not be known
before the components were sepa-
rated: अनुपसर्जनात् | प्रश्छिछन् !
अनुपसर्जन अ अ अत् इति | M.Bh. on I.
1.27 Vart. 6; cf also M. Bh. 6a
P.II.3.69.
प्रश्|ुष (l) coalescence of two vowels
into ope, as given in R. Pr. II.6,
and 7, gorresponding to the गुण,
वृद्वि nd दूर्वं substitutes prescribd
bytherules आकुण: P.IV 1.87:अक:
सुवृणे दीर्घः WI.1.101: and वृद्धिरेचिvi.
1.88 which are stated under the
jurisdiction of the rule एक: पूर्वपरयोः
WI.1.84: (2) finding out the pre-
sence ofa letter in addition to the
lettersalready present as coalesced,
after splitting the combination
into its different constituent 1etters.
This Practice of finding out an
additional letter is resorted to by
the commentators only to remove
certain difficulties in arriving at
some correct forms which other-
wisecould not be obtained: e. g.
see तूति च where कू is believed to
ड उ"
be a combination T of ग्, क् and ङ्क
See प्रश्लिष्ट and प्रश्लिष्टनिर्दइा.
प्रसेघान lit. linking up; joining; re-
* peating a word in the Kramapatha
' and joining it with the following
word: e. g. the second words ईळ
पुरोहृितम् etc. in अहिं ईळ | ईळ पुरोहितम् |
पुरोहितं यज्ञस्य |
मसचक applicable, but not actually
applied; thc word is used in con-|
. nection with a grammatical rule
applicable, but has not beep aPPl>
e: cf. डेल्सर्गस्य प्रसक्तस्यापवादे वधक्री
भचति, M. Bh. on P. II.3 32, also
प्रसक्तस्यादर्शनं लेपसंज्ञे भवति M. Bh. and
S.K. on P.I.1. 60. The term प्रसक्तं
is opposed to the term अभिानवृत्त.
प्रसङ्ग applicability possibility of be-
ing applied; the word is used
with respect to a grammatical
rule or operation which is on the
point of being applied or taking
place the word प्रति is also used in
the same sense; cf. कं हृि इच्दस्य प्रसङ्गः
यत्र गम्यत चार्थं न च प्रयुज्यत M.Bh.on
P.I.1.60 cf. also द्वौ प्रसङ्ग अन्यार्थां
एकस्मिन् स विप्रतिषेधः,M. Bh. on P.I.4.
2; also cf. प्रसङ्गे सति सदृशतम आदेशः स्यात्
S.K. on स्थानेन्तरतमः P. I.1.50.
प्रसज्यप्रतिषेध prohibition of the possi-
ble application of a rule, generally
laid down by the use of the nega-
tive particle न, together with, Tor
connected with, a verbal activity:
e.g न लुमताङ्गस्य P.I.1.63, नाम P.VI.
4.3, न माङ्योगे VI.4.74 etc. etc: cf.
प्रसज्यप्रतिषधेष्यं क्रियया सह यत्र नञ्ज: cf.also
प्रसज्ययं क्रियागुणौ ततः पश्चान्निवृतिं करोति
M.Bh. on P.II.2.6. In some cases
the negative particle in a compo-
und has also to be taken as stating
a negation by प्रसज्यप्रतिषेधः;cf. M.Bh.
on सुडनपुसकृस्य P.1.1.43, सार्वधातुकमपित्
I.4.2, वादयेोsसत्वे I. 4. 57.
प्रस्ताद् see प्रक्रियाप्रसाद by Vi:halesa.
प्रसारण a term used by ancient gra-
mmarians for संप्रसारण, i.e, the subs-
titution of a corresponding vowel
for a semivowel; e.g. इ for य्, उ
for व्, ऋ for र् and ल for लु: cf. राके
ज्य: प्रसारणम् P.I.1.4. Vart. 6.
प्रसारणिन् that which gets, or is liable
to get the Prasarana or Sarhprasa-
rana substitute;	cf. क्रविधौ सर्वत्र
प्रसारणिभ्येी ड: P.III.2.3 Vद्वrt. 1.
प्रसिद्ध (1) established in existence:
or operation that has become
cf. क्रमेण नार्यः पदसंताविदः पुराsप्रसिद्धा

स्तव
श्रयपूर्वसिद्धिभ:, R. Pr. XI.34 .where
the Kramap:ha is said to be 9ne
which was not established before
the Sarhhitवpatha; (2) knowa ;
cf. अनिटि प्रसिद्धे क्से भविष्यतिM. Blº.
on P. III. 1.45 Vrt. 4, लोकत एते
इाब्दाः प्रसिद्धाः स्त्री पुमान् नपुंसकमिति M.
Bh. on P. IV. 1.3: (3) brought
about, accomplished, realized;
तथास्य छ: प्रसिद्धी भवति M. Bh. on F.
IV. 1.89 Vart. 2, सर्वत्रैव जन्त्वेन सिद्धं
स्यात् , M. Bh. on P.VIII 2.25-
प्रस्ताव context, topic, the same as
प्रकरण which see above; cf, प्रस्तवः
प्रकरणम् ) यथा भेोजनप्रकरणे सैन्धवमानयेति
लवणे प्रतीतिर्गमनप्रक्रणे त्वश्वै, Kaiy. on
M. Bh. I. 1.23 Vart. 4.
प्रस्वरि a word or utterance in three
matrds or moras: cf. स ओमिति
प्रस्वरति त्रिमात्रः प्रस्वारः स्थानं स भवत्युदात्तः R.
Pr. XV.3 whereon Uvvata remarks
त्रिमात्र: प्रस्वारः | See the word ओक्रार.
प्राक् before a particular thing in
place, or in recital, or in mention.
The word is used generally to
show the limit upto which a
particular topic extends; cf. तसि-
लादयः प्राक् पादापः; cf also प्राक् कडारा-
त्समास: P. I. 4.l : cf. also अथ आख्या:
समाम्नाथाधक्रा: प्राग्रिफितात् V. Pr. I. 33.
पट् (I) original, primary,belonging
to the Prakrti as contrasted with
a वैकृत modification or a modified
thing; cf प्रकृतिः स्वभाव:, तत्संबन्धी प्राकृतः.
com. on T. Pr. XIV. 28: cf.
एतद्विकारा एवान्ये, सर्वे तु प्राकृताः समा:
R. Pr. XVII. 23; cf. also तहृन् ि...
प्रूतकारपर: ( नकार्: ) सकारे प्राकृती निर्ग्रंथ
T. Pr. VI. 14; (2) natural, which
can be so ordinarily, without
any specific effort: cf. तस्मात् प्राकृत-
मेवैतत् कर्म यथा कटं करोति, M. Bh. on
P- II. 3.5, cf. also M. Bh. on P.
III 1.5 Vart. 8, 9.
श्राछतसवेरुव a treatise on the gra-
254 प्राग्देशा
mmar of Prakrta Languages attri-
buted to Markandeya
प्राक्क्रीतीय name given to a group of
tad, affixes छ, यत् and others pres-
cribed in the different senses ( हित
and others) given in rules upto
तन क्रीतम् P.V. 1.37 from तस्मै हृितम् P.
W. 1.5.
प्रगिर्वीय name given to tad. affixes
mentioned in rules from P. W.
8.27 upto P. V. 3.95.
प्राग्घितीय name given to tad. affixes
prescribed by rules beginning
with प्राहृताद्यत् P. IV. 4.75 and
ending with सेोदराद्यः P. IV. 4.I09.
प्राग्द्र्शिीय name given to tad. affixes
prescribed in rules from P. V,
3.1 to 25.
प्राग्दीव्यतीय name given to tad. affixes
prescribed by rules beginning
with तस्य विकारः P. IW. 3.134 and
ending with the rule कंसीयपरश्ाब्य-
थोर्यञ्जज्ञौ लुक् च P. IV. 3.168.
प्रग्देशा districts of the east especially
districts to the east of Ayodhya
and Pataliputra, such as Maga-
dha, Vafga and others; nothing
can definitely be said as to which
districts were called Eastern by
Panini and his followers Katy-
yana and Patajali. A Warttika
given in the Kasik but not
traceable in the Mahabhasya
defines Pragdesa as districts situat-
ed to the east of झारावती (probably
the modern river Ravi or a
river near that river ): cf. प्रागुदञ्चौ
विभजते हंसः क्षीरोदके यथा तां विदुषां शब्द-
सिद्धयर्थं सा नः पातु दारावती | Kas. on
एङ् प्राचां दइ P. I. 1.75. There is a
reading सरस्वती in some manus- '
cript copies and सरस्वती is a well-
known river in the Punjab mear
Kuruksetra, which disappears in
the sandy desert to the south: a
reading इरावती is also found and

प्राग्वतीय 255 प्राण्यञ्
इरावती may stand for the river | also स पूर्वस्यार्धसदृशमेकेषाम् T. Pr.
Ravi. इारावती in Burma is simply XI.19 and the commentaries
out of consideration. For details
see Vyakarana Mahabhasya Vol.
VII. pp. 202-204 and 141-142
D. E. Society's Edition.
प्राग्वतीय name given to tad. affixes
prescribed in rules from P. V.
1.18 to 115.
प्राग्वहृतीय name given to tad. affixes
prescribed in rules from P. IV.
4.1 to 76.
प्राचीनमत the view or doctrine of the
former or rather older gram-
marians. The word is used in
many commentary books and the
meaning of the word is to be
decided according to the context.
For example in the works of
Ramacandra, the author of the
Prakriyakaumud and his follow-
ers, the word refers to the view
given by the writers of the Ksi-
kavrtti and the commentaries
thereon in the works of Bhagtoji
and his pupils, it refers to the
writer of the Prakriyakaumudi
in addition to the writers of the
Kasika, while in the works of
Nagesa it refers to the writings
of Bhagoj and his pupils. For
details see Vyakarana Maha-
bhasya Vol. V1I pp. 23-24 D.
E. Society's Edition.
प्राच्यपद्वृति succession of two vowels
where the former vowel, which is
either ए, or ओी remains without
coalescence with the following
vowel अ, even though by
rules it is liable to be changed;
e.g.सुजाते अश्वसूनृते , अध्वर्यो अद्रिभिः सुतम् !
In such cases the vowel अ is pro-
nounced like ए. This view is held
by the senior Sakalya (स्थविरशाकल्य);
cf. प्राच्यपञ्चाल-उपघानिभेोदयाः शाकल्यस्य
स्थविरस्थतरा स्थिति:, R.Pr. II.44: cf.
thereon: cf. also छन्देगानां सात्यमुग्रि-
राणायनीया अर्धमक्रारमर्धमोकारं चाधीयत | सुजांत
ए अश्वसूनृते , अध्वर्यो ओ अद्रिभिः सुतम् | M.
Bh. on Siva Sutra 3, 4 as also on
P.I.1.48.
S
प्राच्यवेयाकरण an easterm grammarian;
the term प्राच्य (eastern) being a
relative term, the east is to be
taken with respect to the place in
the context. The word प्र:चां occurs
many times in Phini's Sutras and
the term प्राक् may refer to countries
east of the river द्वारावती or सरस्वती in
the Punjab. See प्रागेदा above. प्रान्वां is
understood by some commentators
as referring to time, in which case,
the word may refer to ancient
grammarians अपिझालि, दाक्रटायन, इन्द्र
and others who lived before
Panini: cf. प्राचीनवैयाकरणतन्त्रे वान्वानकानि
...Par. Sek. Pari. 1. The word
प्राचीन is, of course, mostly used in
the sense of ancient, rather than
the word प्राच्. For specific peculia-
rities of the eastern grammarians
see pp. 148-149 Vyakarana Maha-
bhsya Vol. VII. D. E. Society's
Edition.
प्राण air, which is instrumental in pro-
ducing sound; cf. बायुः प्राणः कण्ठयमनुम-
दानम् R.Pr.XIII.1.
प्राणपण a gloss on the Mahabhasya
of Patafijali, written by the famous
easterm grammarian Purusottama-
deva of the 12th century A. D., of
which only a fragment of a few
pages is available. As the legend
goes, the name प्राणपणा was given to
the gloss as it was accompanied by
an oath on the part of the author
that his life was at stake if he did
even the slightest injustice to the
author of the Mahabhasya.
प्राण्य् the tad. affix अङ्क prescribed
by the rule प्राणरजतादिभ्येsञ् P. IV.3.

प्रातिपदिक
256
प्रातिपदिकार्थे
154: cf. मयटः प्राण्यन्यः विप्रतिषेधेन P.IV.3.
156 Vart, 4.
प्रातिपदिक lit.available in every word.
The term प्रातिपादिक can be explain-
ed as प्रतिपदं गृहृाति तत् प्रातिपदिकम् cf
P.IV. 4. 39. The term प्रातिपदिक,
although mentioned in the Brah-
maha works, is not found in the
Pratisºkhya works probably be-
cause those works were concerned
with formed words which had been
actually in use. The regular
division of a word into the base
( प्रकृति ) and the affix ( प्रत्यय ) is
available, first in the grammar of
Panini, who has given two kinds
of bases, the noun-base and the
verb-base. The noun-base is
named Pratipadika by him while
the verb-base is named Dhtu.
The definition of Pratipadika is
given by him as a wond which is
possessed of sense, but which is
neither a root mor a suffix: cf.
अर्थवदधातुरप्रत्ययः प्रातिपदिकम् . P.I. 2.45.
Although his definition includes,
the krdanta words,the taddhitanta
words and the compound words,
still, Panini has mentioned them
separately in the rule कृत्तद्धितसमासाश्च
, P. I. 2.45 to distinguish them as
secondary noun-bases as compared
with the primary noun-bases which
are mentioned in the ruleअर्थवदधातुर-
प्रत्ययः प्रातिपदिकम्, Thus,Panini implies
four kinds of Pratipadikas मूलभूत,
कृदन्त, तद्धितान्त and समास, The Wartti-
kakra appears to have given nine
kinds-गुणवचन, सर्वनाम, अव्यय, तद्धितान्त,
कृदन्त, समास, जाति, संख्या and संज्ञा. See
Warttikas 39 to 44 on P. I. 4. 1.
Later on, Bhojarja in his Spngra-
Prakasa has quoted the definition
अर्थवदधातु< given by Panini, and has
given six subdivisions.: cf. नामा-
ब्ययानुकरणकृत्तद्धितसमासाः प्रातिपदिकानि Sr.
Prk. I. page 6. For the sense con-
veyed by a Pratipadika or noun-
base, see प्रातिपदिकार्थ.
प्रातिपदिककार्य corresponding to अङ्गकार्य
in the case of the declinables,
which the Stºtrakara mentions
specifically with respect to the
noun-base.
प्रातिपदिकग्रहृष्ण express mention by
wording of a noun-base as in
दित्यदित्यादित्य >, सुधातुरकङ् च etc., and
not by description as अदन्त in अत
इञ् (P.IV.1.95) or in a group of
words ( गण ) ; cf. प्रातिपदिकग्रहणे लिङ्ग-
विद्विष्टस्यापि ग्रहृणम् Par. Sek. Pari. 71,
which recommends the feminine
form of the base for an operation,
provided the base is specifically
expressed and not merely des-
cribed. e. g युवतिः खलति: युवखल्ते:,
वटकस्यापत्यं चाटकैरः, वह्नीनां पूरणीं बहुतिथी
etc.
प्रातिपदिकस्वर the general accent of the
Pratipadika viz. the acute ( उदाश्त )
for the last vowel as given by the
Phip sutra फिषः ( प्रातिपदिकस्य ) अन्त
उदात्त:; cf. also प्रातिपदिकस्वरस्यावकाशा: |
अाम्न: | M. Bh. on P. VI. 1.9t
Wrt. 7.
प्रातिपदिकार्थ denoted sense of a Prati-
padika or a noun-base. Standard
grammarians state that the denota-
tion of a pratipadika is five-aold
viz. स्वार्थ, द्रव्य, लिङ्ग, संख्या and कारक्र.
The word स्वार्थ refers to the causal
factor of denotation or प्रवृत्तिनिमित्त
which is of four kinds जाति, गुण,
क्रिया and संज्ञा as noticed respectively
in the words गौः, शुक्:,चलः and डित्थ:.
The word द्रक्य refers to the in-
dividual object which sometimes
is directly denoted as in अश्वमानय,
while on some occasions it is in-
directly denoted through the genus
or the ger:eral notion as in ब्राह्मणः
पूज्य:, लिङ्ग the gender, सेख्या the num-
ber and क्रूरक्र the case-relation are

प्रातळीमय 257
प्रातहृत
the denotations of the case-termi-
nations, but sometimes as they
are conveyed in the absence of a
case-affix as in the words पञ्च, दशा,
and others, they are stated as the
denoted senses of the Pratipadika,
while the case-affixes are said to
indicate them: cf. बाचिका द्योतिका व
रुयुः शब्दादीनां विभक्तय: Vakyapadya.
प्रातिलोम्य in inverse order, antithesis.
' reverse sense; e. g. प्र and परा mean
the reverse of अा, or प्रति means the
reverse of आभ; cf अा इत्यर्वागर्थ | प्र
परत्यतस्य प्रातिलोम्यम् etc. Nir. I. 4.
पातिशाख्य a work on Vedic grammar
of a specific nature, which is
concerned maimly with the changes,
euphonic and others, in the Pada
text of the Samhita as compared
with the running text, the Sarhhita
itself The Pratisakhya works are
neither concerned with the sense
of words, nor with their division
into bases and affixes, nor with
their etymology. They contain,
more or less,Vedic passagesarrang-
ed from the point of view of
Satindhi. In the Rk Pratisakhya,
available to-day, topics of metre,
recital, phonetics and the like are
introduced, but it appears that
originally the Rk Pratisakhya, just
like the Atharva Pratisºkhya, was
concerned with euphonic changes,
the other subjects being introduced
later on. The word प्रातिदाख्य shows
that there were such treatises for
everyone of the several Sakhs or
branches of each Veda many of
which later on disappeared as the
number of the followers of those
branches dwindled. Out of the
remaining ones also, many were
combined with others of the same
Veda. At present, only five or six
Pratisakhyas are available which !
are the surviving representatives of
33
}
the ancient ones -the Rk Prati-
sºkhya by Saumaka, the Taittiriya
PrtiSikhya, the Vajasaney Prati-
Skhya by Katyayana, the Atharva
Pratisakhya and the Rk Tantra by
Sakatayana, which is practically a
Pratisakhya of the Sima Veda. The
word पार्षद orपारिषद was also used for
the Pratisakhyas as they were the
outcome of the discussions oflearn-
ed scholars in Wedic assemblies; cf
परिषदि भवं पार्षदम्. Although the
Pratisakhya works in nature, are
preliminary to works on grammar,
it appears that the existing Prati-
sºkhyas, which are the revised and
enlarged editions of the old ones,
are written after Panini's grammar,
each one ofthe present Prtisakhyas
representing, of course, several
ancient Pratisakhyas, which were
written before Panini. Uvvata, a
learned scholar of the twelfth cen-
tury has written a briefcommenta-
ry on the Rk Pratisakhya and ano-
ther one on the Vajasaneyi Prti-
sakhya. TheTaittiriya PratiSakhya
has got two commentaries -one
by Somayarya, called Tribhsya-
ratna and the other called Vaidika-
bharana written by Gopalayajvan.
There is a commentary by Ananta
bhatta on the Wijasaneyi Pratis्-
khya. These commentaries are
called Bhasyas also.
प्रातिश्रुत्क places of echo or reverbera-
tion viz.chest and others, of sound
which gets its origin at the navel
but becomes reverberated at chest,
throat, top of the month, mouth
and nose; cf. तस्य ( उत्पत्त्याश्रयस्य
इाब्दस्य ) प्रातिश्रुत्कानि भवन्ति उर: कण्ठ: शिरो
मुखं नारीके इति, T. Pr. II. 3.
प्रातहत name given to the circumflex
vowel, standing at the beginning
of a word and following the final
vowel of the previous word which

प्राथमकल्पिक
258
प्रामाणिक
is acute ( उदात्त ): cf. अपि चनानापदस्थ-
मुदात्तमथ वत्सांहृितेन स्वर्यते स प्रतिहृतः
T. Pr. xx. 3.
प्राथमकल्पिक of the first type or kind;
primary, as opposed to secondary;
cf. अयं खल्वपि बहुव्रीहुिरस्येव प्राथमकायर्का
यस्मिनैकपद्यमैकस्वर्यमकविभाक्तिक्रत्वं च, M.Bh.
on P. I. I. 29, I. 1. 30; I. 2. 42;
cf also अथवहृ र्कोन्वित् प्राथमकल्पिकौ प्लक्षन्य-
ग्रोधौ कौचित् क्रियया वा गुणेन वा M. Bh.on
P. II. 2. 29 Vनrt. 15.
प्राथम्य first preference; first place;
priority; cf. कुतः पुनः प्राथम्यं किं दाब्दत:
आहोस्विदथेत: | M. Bh. on I. 3. 1.
Vart. 11.
श्रादि a group of words beginning
with श्र, which are all prefixes or
upasargas e. g, म, परा, अप etc. cf
` कुगतिप्रादय: P. II. 2. 18.
प्रnदिसमास a compound with प्र and
others prescribed by the rule
कुगतिप्रादय: P. II.2.18 and explained
in detail by the Warttikas headed
by the Varttika प्रादये गताद्यर्थे प्रथमया
P. II. 2. 18 Wart. 4, which comes
under the general head तत्पुरुत्र ;
the compound is also called प्रादित-
पुरुष; cf. कथं प्रभावे राशः | प्रकृष्टे भाव इति
प्रादिसमासेो भविष्यति | KS. on P. III.
3.24 cf also प्रान्तः पर्यन्तः " बहुव्रीहुिरयं
प्रादिसमासे वा Kas. on P. VI. 2. 180.
प्रादेशिक belonging to the root; the
word श्रदश has here the peculiar
sense ofa root which has the mean-
ing of the noun (under discussion).
cf. तद्यत्र स्वरसंस्कारौ समर्थौ प्रादेशेकन गुणेन
अन्वितौ स्यातां संविज्ञातानि तानि Nir I. i2.
प्राघान्य preponderance, principal
nature as opposed to the sub-
ordinate one ( धिषणत्व ): cf.
यत्र प्राधान्येन अल् आश्रीयते तत्रैव प्रतिषेधः स्यात्
M. Bh. on P. I. 1. 56. cf. also
प्राधान्येन व्यपदेशा भवन्ति |
पपक applying in the usual way; lit.
Ieading to the injunction or विधिज्ञास्त्र:
cf. किं पुनरिदं नियमार्थे आहृीाखत् प्रापकम्
M. Bh. on P. I. !.70; cf. also M.
Bh. on P. III. 4. 110.
शमापण reaching, arrival; cf. प्रत्यक्षमाख्या-
नमुपदेशो, गुणैः प्रापणमुर्दश: M. Bh. on
P. I. 3.2.
प्राप्तविभाषा or प्राप्तविकल्पत्व, optional
prcscription of some operation or
rule which otherwise is obligatory;
cf. लेपे विभाषा " प्राप्तविभाषेयम् | किमर्थन
येोगात् | Ks. on P. VIII. 1.45; cf.
also हृक्रोरन्यतरस्याम् ' प्राप्तविकल्पत्वाद् द्विती-
येत्र I Kas. on P. I. 4.53.
| प्राप्ति application of a rule, arrival
at aparticular form incidence,
occurrence of a particular rule;cf.
अनन्तरा या प्राप्तिः सा प्रतिषिध्यते M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.43.
प्रातिज्ञ a person who knows only the
application of a rule and the
realization from it of the form that
can be arrived at, as opposed to
one who knows the form that is
desired or current; cf प्रातिशेर्र्यो देवानां-
प्रिय: न त्विाचज्ञः इष्यत एतदूपमिति	M.
Bh. on II. 4. 56 Vart. l ; cf. also
किरतिं चर्करीतान्तं पचतीत्यत्र यी नयेत् | प्रातिहं
तमहं मनेय प्रारब्धसेतन संप्रहृः | M. Bh. on
WII. 4.92.
प्रIय lit. which is arrived at: an
object which is to be reached;
cf. प्राप्यं कर्म; the word प्राप्य is used
as a word qualifying the word
कर्म, in which case it is called
नाप्यकर्म, as for example ग्रामं in ग्रामं
गच्छति 'दवदत: or वेदमधीते माणवकः.
The term प्राप्य is defined as क्रियाक्-
तविशेषानवगतै कतुः क्रियया अनस्थितं अास्थितं
वा यद्वाप्यते तत् प्राप्यं कर्म । cf. कर्तुरीप्सितमं
कर्म | ततु त्रिविधं निर्धत्र्य र्धिकार्यं प्राप्यमिति |
यस्य क्रियाकृतानां धोषाणां सर्वथानुपलब्धिः
तत् प्राप्यम्. Spngira Prakasa IV.
प्रमाणिक authoritative; those that
talk with authority; cf. प्रामाणिक्रमत-
मेतत्, a phrase often used by com-
mentatOrs. __

प्रामाण्य
259
S _
प्रौढमनोरमा
प्रामाण्य authority: cf. यथोत्तरं मुनीनां ;
प्रामाण्यम् S. K. on न वहुत्रीर्ह P. I.
1.29; cf. also the usual Texpression
वचनप्रामाण्यात् Ka8. on P. VII. 2.7.
प्रामादिक faulty, uttered or expressed
with a fault: inaccurate.
प्राय general nature, general public;
cf. प्राय इति लोको व्यपादद्यत, M. Bh.
on P. V. 1.16: cf. प्रायेाथे वृत्तमित्येते
पादज्ञानस्य हेतवः R. Pr. XVII.16: cf.
also, लैौकिकीं विवक्षा यत्र प्रायस्य संत्ययः M.
Bh. on P. V. 1.16.
गायक optional, to be done at plea-
sure, common, usual; cf. प्रायकं
चैतत् |
प्रायोक्त्र belonging to one who speaks
or says; cf. अस्त्येव प्रायोक्त्री विवक्षा अस्ति
लौकिकीं	M. Bh. on P. V. 1.16.
प्रावचन accentuation, as noticcd in
the original Sarhhitapgha: cf.
प्रावचने वा यजुषि | प्रवचनद्देनं अर्षपाठ
उच्यते | तत्र भवः स्वर्: प्रावचन: स च यजुबि
भवति | तान्ते वा यज्ञकर्मणि | V. Pr.
I. 132.
गश्लिष्ट name of the circumflex
accent possessed by a vowel which
has resulted from the coalescence
of two similar vowels, as for
example in fभन्द्धदम् | see प्रश्ठिट.
गसाद्चासिन्याय inclusion of a thing |
even though it possesses an addi-
tional factor, or consideration,
other than what is referred to; cf
प्रासादवासिन्यायेन ग्रहणं भवति | तद्यथा कश्चित्
प्रासादवासिनः | केचिद्भूमिवासिनः | केचिदुभय-
वासिन: | ये प्रासादवासिनः गृह्यन्ते त प्रसाद्-
वासिपहृणेन .	य भुमिवासिनः गृह्यन्ते त
भ्रमेवासिग्रहणेन " ये उभयवासिनः गृह्यन्त त
प्रासादवासिग्रहणेन भूमिवासिग्रहृणेन च	M.
Bh. on P. I. 1.8. _
मियादि a class of words headed by
the word प्रिया which do not allow
their previous word in a bahu-
vrihi compound to take the mas-
culine base by the rule ख्त्रिया:
पुवत्.. P. VI. 3.84: e. g. कल्याणीप्रियः
For details, see Kas, on P. WI.
3.34.
प्रेक्षा (1) appearance, the being seen
or understood; cf. दूता निर्वृत्या इदमा-
जगाम " पञ्चम्यर्थप्रेक्षा वां षष्ठघर्थप्रेक्षा बा !
Nir. I. 17; (2) thoughtful consi-
deration, cf. य एव मनुष्यः प्रेक्षापूर्वकारी
भवति सोSधुवेण निमित्तन धुवं निमित्तमुपादते,
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.26 Vart, 5,
प्रेक्षादि a class of words to which the
tad. affix इन् is added in the four
senses given in P. IV. 2.67-70;
e. g- प्रक्षी, धुवकी; cf. Kas. on P.
IV . 2.80.
प्रेप्सु desiderative adjective: a word
formed by adding the affix उ in the
sense of * an agent ' to a desidera-
tive root by the rule सनाढांसाभक्ष उ:
P.III.2.168. The term प्रेप्सु was used
for such nouns by ancient gram-
marians.
_K -
प्रेषर्णी a term used by ancient gra-
mmarians for the imperative
mood or लेोद् of Panini.
नैषादिं the senses ष *order to do,
अतिसर्ग *permission to do and प्राप्तका-
लता *fitness of time', as possessed
by the potential passive partici-
ples; cf विधीयन्ते प्रैषादिषु लेीडादयः M.
Bh. on P. III. 1.26.
_
प्रोक्तपुस्क possessed of the masculine
gender
ग्रौढमनोरमा popularly called मनोरमा
also; the famous commentary on
the Siddhantakaumud of Bha-
troj Diksita written by the author
himself to explain fully in a
scholarly manner the popular
grammar written by him; , the
word प्रौढमनेारमा is used in contrast
with बालमनोरमा another commen-
tary on the Siddhantakaumudi
by Vasudevadiksita. Om account
of the difficult nature of it, it is
ususal to read the प्रौढमनेारमा upto
the end of the Karaka-prakarana

S-->
प्रांढमनोरमारवण्डन
260 पू
only in the Sanskrit PathaSalas
before the study of the Sabdendu-
sekhara and the Paribhsendu-
sekhara is undertaken.
प्रौढमनोरमाखण्डन (1) a grammatical
work written by a grammarian
named Cakrapani of the Sesa
family of grammarians. The work
is meant to refute the arguments
of Bhagoj Dikita in his Praudha-
manorama; (2) a grammar work
written by the famous poet and
rhetorician Jagannātha in refuta-
tion of the doctrines and expla-
nations given in the Praudhamano-
rama by the stalwart Gramma-
rian Bhattoj Diksita. The work is
mot a scholarly one and it has got
a tone of banter. It was written
by Jagannatha to show that he
could also write works on Gram-
mar and the bearded pedant
Bhattoj should not be proud ofhis
profound scholarship it Grammar.
The work of Jagannatha was
named मनोरमाकुचमर्दन possibly by his
followers or even by himself.
प्रौढमनोरमाटीका a commentary on
Bhattoj DikSita's Praudhamano-
ram written by Bhattoji's grand-
son Hari Diksita. The commen-
tary is called लघुशब्दरत्न or simple
शब्दरत्न which is an abridgment of
the author's work वृहृच्छब्दरत्न. The
Laghusabdaratna is widely studied
along with the Praudhamanorama
in the Pathasalas. '
प्लक्षादि a class of words headed by
the word प्लक्ष to which the tad.
affix अण् is added in the sense of
*a fruit' e.g. प्लाक्षम् , cf.Kas.
्
↑ायण an ancient Wedic scholar
who presumably wrote a work on
Vedic grammar (of the type of the
Pratikhya works).For adiference
of view he is quoted in theTaitti-
riya Pratisakhya: cf.न प्लाक्षिप्लाक्षायणयेाः
T.Pr. IX.6.
छाक्षि an ancient writer of a Prti-
sakhya work quoted in the Taitti-
riya Pratisakhya.See प्लाक्षायण above.
The words प्लाक्ष and प्लाक्षयण as
also प्लाक्षी ( feminine ) occur in the
Mahabhasya also, but not in the
Ganapatha of Panini.
प्ठत protracted, name given to
vowels in the protracted grade.
The vowels in this grade which
are termed protracted vowels are
possessed of three matras and in
writing they are marked with the
figure 3 placed after them. In
pronunciation they take a longer
time than the long or द vowels:
cf. ऊकालोज्झ्रस्वदीर्घप्लुतः P. I.2.27. Th6
word is derived from प्लु ( also)
I Atmane to go, and explained as
प्लवत इति, The word प्लवंत is often
found for प्लुतो भवति in the Pratisव्र-
khya works: cf also मात्रा हृस्वस्तावद्व-
ग्रह्यान्तरं, द्व दीर्धस्तिस्रः प्लुत उच्यते स्वरः । अध:
स्विदासी 3 दुपरि स्विदासीद् अर्थे प्लुतिभस्व
विन्दती3 त्रिः ll R. Pr. I.16.
प्लुठति prolation or protraction of a
vowel when it is possessed of three
mitrds; cf.. R. Pr. I.31. See कुत
above; cf. अविद्वांस: प्रत्यभिवादे नाम्नी येन
प्लुतिं विदुः | कामं तेषु तु विप्रोष्य स्त्रीष्विबायम्
बदत् M.Bh. on P.I.1 Ahnika 1.
प्वादि a class of roots headed by the
root पृ which get their vowel short-
ened in the four conjugational
tenses as also before the pres.part.
affix; e.g. पुनाति पुनानः, लुनाति, बुनन्
etc.; cf Kas. on P.VII.3.80. )
फ
↑ hard labial consonant, aspirate
of प्, possessed of the properties श्वास
घोष, महाप्राणता, and कण्ठविवृतता.

' फ
261
घ
फ (l) the letter or sound प्,the vowel
अ being added for facility of pro-
nunciation;(2) the affix फ for which |
अायन is always substituted as given !
by Panini in P. VII.1.2.
फक् (1) tad.affix फ marked with mute
कृ for effecting the वृद्धि substitute
for the initial vowel of the word to
which it is applied. The initial
letter प् of all the affixes beginning
with प् in Pinini's grammar is al-
ways changed into आयन्. The tad.
affix क् is affixed (i) in the sense
ofगेोत्रापत्यgrandchild and his issues,
to the words नड and others as also
to the wor.js ending with the affixes
यञ् and इञ्ज and words इरद्वत्, दर्भ, द्र-ं
etc. e.g. नाडायन:, छाछङ्कायन:, दाक्षायण:
प्लक्षायणः, द्रौणायनः, वैदः, अौधे: etc.: cf
P.IV. 1.99-103: (2) as a caturar-
thika affix in the four senses
mentioned in P. IV. 2.67-70 to |
the words पक्ष and others e. g.
पाक्षायणः, तौषायणः: cf. P.IV. 2.80.
फ¶ tad. affix फ marked with ， caus-
ing the Wrddhi substitute for the
initial vowel of the word, applied
in the sense of grandchildren and
their issues to words अश्व and others,
as also to the word भर्ग; e.g.आश्वायन',
अामायन:, भार्गायण: cf. अश्वादिभ्यः फञ्ज
and भगत् त्रैगर्त: cf. P.IV.1.110 and
111.
फणादिं a class of seven roots headed
by the root फण्, which belong to
the first conjugation and which
have optionally their vowel अ
changed into ए and the reduplica-
' tive syllable ( अभ्यास) dropped, in
the forms of the perfect tense
before the affix इथ and weak affixes;
e. g. पेणतु:, पेणु:, फणिथ फफणतु:, पफणुः,
पफणिथ etc. cf. P.VI.4.25.
फूल (1) fruit or benefit of an action
which goes to the agent; cf. फलव्या-
root which is given as Ubhaya-
padin in Painis Grammar takes
the Atmanepada affixes when the
fruit of the activity is meant for
the agent, while otherwise it takes
the Parasmaipada affixes; (2) The
word फळ also means the result
of a grammatical operation or
grammatical injunction.
फि a common term for the affixes
फिन् and फञ्.
' फिञ्， tad. affix आयान applied to the
word fममत in the sense of offspring
e.g. मैमतायनि:: cf. P.IV.1.150: it is
also added in the samesense of (off-
spring) to the words तिक्र and others
as also to the word कौसल्य, two-
syllabled words ending with अण्
and to words वाकिन and others:e.g.
तैकायनि:, कौसल्यायनि:, वाकिनकायान: etc.:
cf. P.IV.1.159. _
a small work on accents
attributed to Santanava,an ancient
Vedic scholar who lived before
Patafijali if not before Panini, as
the latter has not referred to him.
There is an anonymous commen-
tary upon it.
फिन् tad. affix आयनि in the sense of
ofispring added according to the
Eastern grammarians to words not
beginning with आ, ए or औ, e.g.
बुचुकायनिः,cf. IV.1.160.
पेडगेन् [ FADDEGON, BAREND ]
a scholar of Sanskrit Grammar,
who has written a book * Studies
in Panini's Grammar'.
ब
ब् third letter of the labial class
which is soft and inaspirate.
ब or बकार the letter ब्, the vowel अ
as also the word कार being added
for facility of utterance; cf. T. Pr.
पारयोर्धातु: Vaiyakaraja-bhisana. A
I. 17.21, The letter वृ is some-

बनेट्
times used for वृ especially when it
stands at the beginning of a word,
for which scholars use the expre-
ssion ववयेारभद:.
बनैल् [ BURNELL., Dr.j a European |
Sanskrit scholar who has written
a learned booklet * Aindra School
of Sanskrit Grammarians ' which
discusses the problem of the
Aindra grammar. See एन्द्र.
बर्वग्ता a fault in pronunciation of
the type of roughness or barbar-
ousness in the utterance of the
letter र् : cf. बर्वरता असौकुमार्य रेफ
Uvvaga on R.Pr.XIV. 8.
बस्व्र्य (written as वत्स्ये or वत्स्य possibly
' through mistake in the printed
Calcutta Edition); connected with
the socket of the teeth. As the
utterance of र् proceeds from the .
socket of the teeth, र् is called बख्र्य.
cf. उपसंहृततर च जिह्वाग्रमृकारकौरळकरषु
बर्वेषुपसंहृरति T.Pr.II.18.बस्र्व is explain-
ed here by the commentator as
दन्तपङ्क्तरुपरिष्टादुच्चप्रदेशेषु ऋकारस्य ऋकारस्य
लकारस्य च बरुवोः स्थानम् | The word
उपरिष्टात् in the explanation given
above is questionable;the explana-
tion given by Uvvata in his com-
ment on वत्स्र्यमेकं इच्छन्ति रेफम् R. Pr. I.
20.wiz. वत्संशब्दन दन्तमूलादुपरिष्टादुच्नः प्रदद्या
उच्यते appears better although appa-
rently बत्से is written in the textfor
बरूर्व or वत्स्र्व.
बलराम writer of a gloss named
धातुप्रक्राळा on the Dhatuptha of
Pव्रnini. ! _
बलादि (1) a class of words headed by
the word बल, to which the tad.
affix य is added in the four senses
given by Panini in IV.2.67-70.
e. g. बल्य: कुल्यम्, तुल्यम् , वन्यम् etc.
cf Kas, onTP.IV.2.80; (2) a class
of words headed by बल which take
the possessive tad. affix मत् option-
ally with the regular affix ईदै
262
बहिरङ्गासिद्धत्व ,
e. g. बलवान् , बली; cf Kas. on P.
V. 2.136.
बलीयस्त्व relative superiority in
strength possessed by rules of
grammar or by operations based
on rules of grammar. This Supe-
riority is decided generally on any
one or more of the four recognised
criteria such as परत्व, नित्यत्व, अन्तरङ्गत्व
and अपवादत्ब. The phrase अन्तरङ्गबली-
यस्त्वात् very frequently occurs in
the Warttikas and in the Mah-
bhsya: cf. M.Bh. on P. III. 1.67,
VI.i.17, 85 Vart. 15, VI. 4.62 and
VII.1.1.
| बढ short term or pratyahara for the
consonants from ब to mute ऋ in
the Mahesvara stitra i. e. the con-
sonants ब्र, ग्, ड् and द्-
बहिरङ्ग a rule or operation which is
बहुिरङ्ग (lit. external); the word बहिरङ्ग
is used in grammar in connection
with a rule or operation, the cause
( निमित्त )of which occurs later in
place or time than the cause of
the other which is called अन्तरङ्ग. For
the various kinds of बहिरङ्गत्व see the
word अन्तरङ्ग where the kinds of
अन्तरङ्गत्व are given.
बहिरङ्गपरिभाषा the Paribha or the
maxim असिद्धं बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्ग (Par. Sek.
Pari. 50) which cites the com-
parative weakness of the fule or
operation which is Bahirafga.
बहिरङ्गलक्षण an operation or rule
which is characterized as बहिरङ्ग: cf
असिद्धं बहिरङ्गलक्षणमन्तरङ्गलक्षणे M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.57; cf. also M.Bh. on P. I.
4.2 Vart. 21.
बहिरङ्गासिद्धत्व invalidity i. e. non-
occurrence or non-application of
a bahirafga rule or operation.be-
fore the antarafga operation which
is looked upon as stronger occurr-
ing earlier to the mind, or in the
wording, as it does. '

बहु
263
बहुव्रीहिप्रकृतिस्वर
बहु plural, many, the word is used
in the sense of abundance also; cf.
बहुषु बहुवचनम् P. I.4.2l and बहेोलेपो भू
न्ववही:VI. 4.158.
बहुच् tad. suffix वहु which is always
prefixed to a noun in the sense of
* almost complete ', * almost full',
*to a considerable extent';e.g. बहुगुडा
द्राक्षा: cf. विभाषा सुपो बहुच् पुरस्तालु P. V.
3.68.
बहुप्रक्रुति (l) consisting of a large
number of verbal parts in deriva-
tion; बहृयः प्रकृतये यत्र; (2) a com-
pound in which the constituent |
words are all in the plural number,
cf. सर्वे द्वन्द्वो विभाषैकवद्भवति | वहुप्रकृतिरिति
वक्तव्यम् M. Bh. on P.II.4.12Vart.l ;
(3) a compound word ( पद ) made
up of many constituent words cf.
बहूनि पदानि यत्र तद् बहुप्रकृति पदम् Wj.
Prat. V. 7.
बहुमध्यगत a word which has entered
between two constituent words of
, a compound by splitting in a way
the compound e. g. the word च in
ईयत नरा च शंसं दैव्यम् Rg. Veda IX.
86.42; cf. एतानि परिगृह्णीयात् बहुमध्यगतान
च | R.Pr.X.7. explained by Uvvata
as बहूनां पदानां मध्यगतानि च यानि पदानि
तानि अतिक्रम्य परिग्रहृयात् !
बहुळ lit. variously applicable; the
word is used in the rules of Panini
in connection with a grammatical
rule or affix or the like that is
seen necessarily applied in some
cases, optionally applied in a few
other cases and not at all applied
in the other cases still. The word
बहुलम् is used by Panini in all such
cases. See P. II. i.32, 57; II. 3.62;
LI.4.39, 73.76, 84 III. 1.34 etc.;
cf the usual explanation of बहुलम्
given by grammarians in the lines
केचित्प्रवृत्तिः काचिदप्रवृत्तिः कचिाद्वभाषा कचि-
दन्यदेव | विधेर्विधानं बहुधा समीक्ष्य चतुर्विधं
. बाहुलकं वदन्ति Com. V. Pr. III.18.
बहुलपाद् name given by grammarians
to the third pada of the third
adhyaya of the Astdhyayi.
बहुवचन the plural number; the
affixes of the plural number
applied to noun-bases as also to
roots cf. बहुषु बहुवचनम् P. I. 4.21.
बहुर्वीहि a compound similar in
meaning to the word बहुव्रीहिं ( pos-
sessed of much rice ) which, in
sense shows quite a distinct object
than those which are shown by
the constituent members of the
compound; a relative or adjective
compound.There are various kinds
of the Bahuvrihi compound such
as समानाधिकरणबहुव्रीहि, व्यधिकरणबहुव्रीहि,
संख्यावहुव्रीहि,.दिग्बहुव्रीहृि, सहुबहुव्रीहि, नञ्जबहु-
व्रीहि, and अनेकपदेर्वेदुनीहि which depend
upon the specific peculiarity notic-
ed in the various cases. Panini in his'
grammar has not given any defini-
tion of बहुव्रीहि, but has stated that a
compound other than those already
given viz. अब्ययीभाव, द्वन्द्व and तत्पुरुष,
is बहुव्रीहिं and cited under Bahu-
vrihi all cases mentioned above;
cf देषां बहुव्रीहिः II. 3.23-28; also cf.
अन्यपदार्थप्रधानो बहुव्रीहि: M. Bh. on P.
II. 1.6; II. 1.20; II. 1.49.
-_s conventional term used
for the second pada of the sixth
adhyaya of Panini's Astadhyayi. '
बहुर्वीहिप्रकृतिस्वर the accent peculiar
to, or specifically mentioned in the
case of the Bahuvrihi compound
viz. the retention of its own
accents by the first member, in
spite of the general rule that a
compound word has the last
vowel accented acute i.c. उदात्त. cf.
बहुव्रीहौ प्रकृत्या पूर्वपदम्.. P. VI. 2.1.
The expression बहुव्रीहिस्वर in this
wery sense is used in the Mah-
bhasya cf. बहुव्रीहिस्वरं शास्ति समासान्तविधेः
सुकृत् M. Bh.on P. VI. 2.1.. .

बहुख्
264
बालंभट्ट
बहुच् multisyllabled, a word which
contains three, or more than three
vowels: the word occurs , many
times in the sutras of Panini cf
P. II. 4.65, IV. 2.73, IV. 2.109,
IV. 3.67: V. 3.78, VI. 2.83,
WI. 3.118.
बहुपेक्ष lit. depending on many; the
word is used in the sense of de-
pending on many causal factos
( निमित्तानि ) and given as the defi-
nition of a kind of बहुिरङ्ग by some
, grammarians cf. अल्पापेक्षमन्तरङ्गे बह्वपेक्ष
बहिरङ्गम् . This kind of अन्तरङ्गबहिरङ्गत्व,
cited by Kaiyata is, however,
disapproved by Nagssabhatta; gf
बहुिरङ्गतान्तरङ्गाब्दाभ्यां बहुपेक्षत्वाल्पापेक्षत्वये:
इदंमर्यादया अलाभाच्व ， तथा सति असिद्धं
वेडुक्षेमंल्पापेक्ष इत्येव वदेत्	Par. Sek. on
Pari. 50.
बहुथे lit, the meaning of the word
. There are many senses of the
word बहु out of which 'plurality'
is the sense usually seen. The
word also means fcollection;' cf.
ग्रामशब्देये बहुर्थः | अस्त्येव दालसमुदये
व्रर्तत | तद्यथा | ग्रामो दग्ध इति M. Bh.
on P. I. 1.8, 2l,
a class of words headed by
ब्रहृ to which the fem. affix ई ( डीप् )
is added to form the feminine
base; the words ending in अ in |
this class take the fem. affix अा
( टाप् ) in case ई which is optional,
is not added other words remain .
as they are, if ई, is not added;
6c. 8. बह्वी, बहु:; पद्धतिः, पद्धती; गति:, _
गती चण्डी, चण्डा: etc. cf. Kas. on
P. IW. 1.45.
बाध sublation, setting aside; , सामान्य-
इाखस्य विद्वेषद्वात्रेण बाध: Par. Sek. on
Pari. 51.
बाधक lit. that which sublates or sets
aside: generally a special rule which
sets aside a general rulc: cf. यनं ना-
प्राप्ते ये विधिरारभ्यते स तस्य बाधकं भवति,
बा
Pari. Patha of पुरुषेत्तमदेव Pari. 51;
cf. also नैतज्ज्ञापकसाध्यं अपवादैरुत्सग
बाध्यन्त इति | बाधकेनानेन भवितव्यं सामान्य-
विहृितस्य विशेषविहिंतन	M.Bh. om P. II.
1.24 Vart. 5. बाधक is used as a
synonym of, अपवाद, cf अपवादढाब्देत्र
बाधकपर: Par. Sek. Pari. 58.
धकत्व the same as बाध ; sublation;
setting aside; this sublation is
described to be of two types-
(1) complete sublation when the
rule set aside, is for ever set aside
and cannot, by the maxim called
तक्रकौण्डिन्यन्याय, be applied again; cf.
द्ध ब्राह्मणेभ्यो दीयतां तक्रं कौण्डिन्यायेति संत्यपि
संभव दधिदानस्य तक्रदानं निवर्तकं भवति |
cf M. Bh. on P. I. 1.47; VI. 1.2.
VI. 2.1. etc.: ( 2 ) temporary
sublation when the rule set aside,
can be applied, if possible after
the special rule has been applied;
cf. सर्वथा अनवकाद्धात्वादेव बाधकत्वे स्वस्य
(अनुवक्राबल्य) पूर्वबुद्धरित्येव बाधः | तत्र
बाधके प्रवृत्त यद्युत्सर्गप्राप्तिर्भवति तदा भवत्यब
यथा तत्रैव याडाद्य: Par.Sek.on Pari.57,
The sublation or बाधक्रत्व is not
" only in the case of सामान्यविशेषभाव
बा
and अनवकाशत्व as given above, but
a rule or operation which is पर
(cited later), or नित्य, or अन्तरङ्ग sets
aside the rule or operation which
is पूर्व,or अनित्य,or बर्हिरङ्ग respectively.
This बाध्यबाधकभाव occupies a very
important position in respect of
the application of grammar rules
for arriving at the correct forms
(इष्टरूपसिद्धि) and grammarians have
laid down a number of Paribh∂-
ss in the field of बाध्यबाधकभाव.
लेभइ ( बाळभड् ) surnamed Paya-
gunga or Pyagunde, who has
written a commentary on the
commentary Mitaksar on the
याज्ञवल्क्यस्मृति. Some scholars say that
he was also a great grammarian
and identical with वैद्यनाथ पायगुडे who
has written the commentary कारिका

बाळबोधिनी 265
बिल्वकाद्वि
or गदा on the Paribhasendusekhara,
the Cidasthimala on the Laghusab-
dendusekhara and commentaries
on the Vaiyakarahabhisana,Sabda-
kaustubha and Bhasyapradipodd-
yota. Other scholars believe that
Balarhbhatta was the son of
Vaidyanatha and that he wrote
only the commentary on Mita-
ksar called Balarabhat after him.
(2) There was also a comparative-
ly modern grammarian of Tanjore
who has written small grammar
works बालवेीींधनीं and बालरञ्जनी.
बालबोधिनी name of a grammatical
work ascribed to Balarhbhatta of
Tanjore.
बालमनोरमा name of a commentary
on the Siddhanta-kaumud of
Bhattoj DikSita by Vasudeva
Diksita, a grammarian of Tanjore.
There is also another commentary
called Balamanorama written by
Anantadeva on the Siddhanta-
kaumudi.
बालरञ्जनी name of a grammar work
written by Blarhbhagta ofTanjore.
See बालंभट्ट (2).
बाहुठक the application of a gramma-
tical rule as a necessity to arrive at
some forms in literature especially
in the Vedic Literature as also im
the works ofstandard writers, which
cannot be explained easily by the
regular application of the stated
rules , cf. सुतिड्पग्रहुलिनराणां कालहृलच्-
स्वरकतृयडां च व्यत्ययामच्छति शास्त्रकृदेषां
सोपि च सिध्यति बाहुलकेन M.Bh. .on P.
III. 1.85; also cf. बाहुलकं प्रकृतेस्तनुदृष्टः
प्रायसमुच्चयनादपि तषाम् कायेसद्वेषविधश्च
तदुक्तं नैगमरूढिभवं हि सुसाधु M.Bh. on P.
term is used many times in conne-
ction with the external effort in
the production ofarticulate sound,
as different from the internal
effort अाभ्यन्तरप्रयत्न. The external
effort is described to be consisting
of 11 kinds: cf. बाह्यप्रयत्नस्त्वेकाददाधा !
विवार: संवार: श्वासो नादे घोषोSघोषोsल्पप्राणो
मह्यप्राण उदात्तोनुदात्तः स्वरितश्चेति S.K.on P.
I.1.9.
बाहृादि a class of words headed by
the word बाहु to which the tad.
affix इ ( इङ्ल् ) is added in the sense
of a descendant: e. g. बाहुबि:,
पौष्करसादि:, पााचः etc. The class called
बाहृादि is looked upon as अाकृतिगण on
the strength of the word च in the
rule, so that similar words, not
included in the class, could be
explained; cf. Kas. on P.IV.1.96.
बिदादि a class of words headed by the
word बिद् to which the affix अ (अञ्ज)
is added in the sense of a grand-
child and further descendants;
e.g. वैदः, और्व:, काद्यप:, कौशिक: etc.
The words in this class are mostly
names of sages. In the case of
such words as are not names of
sages, the affix अ is added in the
sense of the offspring and not any
descendant. e.g. पौत्रः, दौहृित्र: etc.;
cf. K8. on P.IV.1.104.
बिन्दु anusvara, letterpronounced only
through the nose: a dot to indicate
the nasal phonetic element shown
in writing above or sometimes after
that letter or vowel, after which it
is uttered; cf. अ इत्यनुस्वारः l अकार
इढ ड्वारणार्थः इति बिन्दुमात्रं वर्णानुस्वारसंज्ञी
भवति | Kat. I.1.19.
III.3.1 . In many sitras, Panini has | बिल्वकादि a class of words headed by
put the word बहुलम् to arrive at
such forms e. g see, P.II.1.32,57;
II.3.62, II.4. 39, 73, 76, 84 etc.
बाह्य ( प्रयत्न ) external effort; the
34
the word बिल्वक्र the affix ईय ( छ )
placed after which is elided when
another tad. affix such as अण् or
the like is placed after them: cf

बिल्वादे __
विल्वा यस्यां सन्ति विल्वक्री तस्यां भवा: वैल्वकाः
Ka8. on P.VI.4.153.
बिल्वादि a class of words headed by
the word बिल्व, to which the tad.
affix अ (अण् ) is added
sense of *a product or *a part';
e.g. वैल्व: मौद्भ:, वैणव: etc.; cf Ks on
P. IV. 3.136.
बुइस्कूल [ BUISKOOL H. E. ) A
European grammarian who has
written an essay on the last three
Padas ofPaninisAsidhyay (त्रिपाद)
under the title *The Tripdi?.
बुद्धि notion, mental understanding;
mental inclination; cf. बुद्धि: संप्रत्यय ]
इत्यनर्थान्तरम् | Cr असेतुर्भवतीत्यस्तिबुद्धय
भवतिबुद्धिं प्रतिपद्यते M. Bh on P. I.1.56
Vart. ]4; (2) mental inclusion;cf.
यां यां विभाक्तं आश्रयितुं बुद्धिरुपजायते सा
साश्रयितव्या M.Bh. on P. I. 1. 57: cf.
अथ बुद्धिः अविशेषात्स्मपुरा इद्, M. Bh.on
III.2.118 Vart. 4.
बुद्धिकमेन् activity of the mind of the
type of understanding as contrast-
ed with the activity of the sense
organs; cf. इन्द्रियकर्म समासादनं बुद्धिकर्म
ब्यवस;य: M. Bh. on P.III. 3. 133
Vart. 8.
बुद्धिसागर writer of a grammar work
who lived in the I Ith century.
वृहण keeping: preservation;cf. क्रमादतो-
युग्यजुषां च हृणम् | वृहृणं संधारणम् ;Uvvaa
on R. Pr. XI. 37.
वृदृच्छब्दरत्न a learned commentary
on the commentary मनीरमा of
भट्टोजीदीक्षित; the commentary was
written by हरिदीक्षित the grandson of
Bhattoji. The work is called
बृहच्छब्दरत्न in contrast with the
लघुशब्दरत्न of the same author
(हरिदीक्षित) which is generally studied
at the Pathasalas all over the
country. The work वृहृच्छब्द्रत्न is
only in a Manuscript form at
Present Some scholars believe
266
in the |
I
बेलवलकर
who ascribed it to his preceptor
Hari Diksita, but the belief is not
correct as proved by a reference
in the Laghusabdaratna,where the
author himself remarks that he
himself has written the वृहृच्छब्दरत्न,
and internal evidences show that
लबुढब्दरत्न is sometimes a word-for-
word summary of the वृहृच्छब्दरत्न.
cfविस्तरस्तु अस्मत्कृते वृहृच्छब्दरत्ने मदन्तेवासि-
इतलधुद्दन्दुर्दाखेर च द्रष्टब्य: Laghusabda-
ratna. For details see Bhandarkar
Ins. Journal Vol. 32 pp.258-60.
दृदृच्छब्दरत्नटीका called वृहृच्छब्दरत्नव्याख्या
written by भवदव.
वृदृती a Wedic metre consisting of
four pdas and 36 syllables. There
are three pdas of eight syllables
and the fourth has twelve
syllables. It has got further sub-
divisions known as पुरस्ताद्वृहृती, उपरि-
ष्टादुद्दहृती, न्यङ्ककुसारणी or उरोतृहृती, ऊध्र्व-
वृहृती विष्टरवृहृती, पिपीलिकमध्यम and
विषमपदा. For details see R.Pr. XVI.
31-37.
किलइ the same as महृत्संज्ञा or महृती
संज्ञा: a bigger terminology as con-
trasted with लबुसंज्ञा brief termino-
logy such as टि, बु, भ etc. for which
(latter) Panini is very particular.
The bigger terms such as सवैनाम,
अात्मनेपद, परस्मैपद and others are
evidently borrowed by Panini
from the ancient grammarians
who lived before him.
वृहदृपेणा name of a commentary on
Koadabhatta's Vaiyakaranabhu-
Sahasra by Mannudeva, who was
called also Mantudeva, who lived
in the latter half of the eighteenth
century.
वृदृद्याकरणसिद्धान्तमञ्जूष a grammar
work written by Ramafiatha
Chobhe.
thatitwaswritten byNagesabhaga, | वेलवलकर [ SHRIPAD KRISHNA

बोथालेग्क
267
भ
BELVALKAR ] a well-known
Sanskrit scholar of the present day
who has been the General Editor
of the Mahabhirata published by
the Bhandarkar Oriental Research
Institute, Poona. He has written
a book on grammar reviewing
very briefiy the various systems
of Sanskrit grammar, which is
named '' Systems of Sanskrit
Grammar '.
बोथळिग्क्र [BOHTLINGK, OTTO] a
German Sanskrit scholar and
Grammarian ofSt.Petersberg, who
has written a shortgloss in German
on Phini's Astadhyay under the
title **Panini's Grarnmatik'with an
introduction and various indexes
at the end. He has also critically
edited Mugdhabodha:ofBopadeva.
बोध्य a technical term for the voca-
tive case in the Jainendra Vyaka-
ratha
बेपि [ BOPP, FRAN2 ] a German
Sanskrit scholar who has written
the famous volumes of *The Com-
parative Sanskrit Grammar''.
बोपदेव a great Sanskrit scholar and
grammarian belonging to Deva-
giri in the greater Maharsra
who was supported by Hemºcri
of Devagiri. He resided at सार्थग्राम
on the river Varad in the first
half of the thirtcenth century. He
wrote a short treatise on Sanskrit
Grammar, which has a number of
peculiarabbreviations for the usual
well-known grammatical terms.
His grammar had a wide spread
in Bengal and it is today a very
common text on Grammar
Bengal. On this account some
scholars believe that he lived in
Bengal. He was the son of Kesava
and pupil of Dhanesa. He is also
the author, .of .: the,.. well-known !**-;
in |.
, work कविकल्पदुम on which he has
written a commentary mamed
कामधेनु or काब्यकामधेनु.
ब्रह्मकाण्ड name given to the first
section or Kanda of Bhartrhari's
Vakyapadya. It deals with Sphota,
and in a way it contains in a nut-
shell the philosophy of Sanskrit
Grammar.
ब्रह्मराा्ी the sacred Sanskrit alphabet
given in the fourteen sitras of Ma-
hesvara, named Aksarasamamnaya
which is called त्रह्मरार्दिता as it contains
the basic letters of दाच्द् which is
Brahma according to Gramma-
rians; cf. सीयमक्षरसमाम्नायो वाक्यसमाम्नायः
पुष्पितः फलितश्चन्द्रतारकवत् प्रतिमण्डितो वेदितव्यो
व्रह्मरार्दिताः M. Bh. Ahnika 2 end; cf.
also एते पञ्चषष्टिवर्णा ब्रह्मराज्ञिरात्मवान्चः V.
Pr.VIII. 26.
ब्राह्मणादि a class of words headed by
the word ब्राह्मण to which the tad,
affix य ( ष्य् ) is added in the
' sense of *nature or *duty': e. g.
ब्राह्मण्यं ( ब्राह्मणस्य भावः कर्म बां ); cf
ब्राह्मणादिराकृतिगणः अादिदाव्दः प्रकारवचन:
Ka8. on P. V.1.24. __
भ
म् fourth letter of the labial class
which is possessed of the pro-
perties कण्ठसंवृतता, नादानुप्रदान, घोष, and
मह्यप्राणत्व.
मं (I) the letter or sound भ् with the
[ vowel अ added for facility of
utterance; (2) a technical term
in the Grammar of Panini given
to a noun base before such case
and taddhita affixes as begin with
any vowel or with the consonant
यु. The utility of this designation
of भ to the base is (l) .to pre-
vent the substitutes which are
, enjoined for the final vowel or
consonant.of a pada (a wordend-

भनक्रार
ing with a case-affix or a base
before case and tad. affixes begin-
ning with any consonant except*
ingय् ) just as the substitution of
Visarga, anusvara, the first or
third consonant, and others given
in P. VIII. 4.37 and the follow-
ing. For the various changes
and operations for a base termed
भू sec P. VI. 4.129 to 175.
भकार the consonant भ् with the
vowel अ and the affix ' कार added
for facility of utterance: cf T. Pr.
I. 17,21.
भन्त्त forming a , part or portion (of
something in connection with
which it has been prescribed as
an augment ) cf. तद्भक्तस्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यते
Vydi Pari. 17; cf also अामः सुडयं
भक्त: अाम्ग्रहणेन ग्राहृष्यत M. Bh. on P.
VII. 1.33.
भक्तल् tad.. affix भक्त applied to the
words भौरिके and others in the
sense of fa place of residence;' cf.
P. IV. 2.54.
भक्ति (1) name given to two of the
five divisions of a Saman which
are प्रस्तावभक्ति, उद्गीथ, प्रतिह्यार, उपद्रव
and निधानभाक्त; (2) the vowel por-
tion surrounding, or placed after,
the consonant ， or ， which (con-
sonant) is believed to be present
in the vowel ऋ or ल respectively
forming its important portion,
but never separately noticed
in it. The vowels ऋ and ल
are made up of one matra
eacha It is contended by the
grammarians that the consonants
र् and º forming respectively the
portion of ऋ and ल, make uphalf-
a-matra, while the remaining half
is made up of the भाक्त of the
vowel surrounding the consonant
or situated after the consonant.
The word which is generally used
268
भक्ष्यनियम a
भट्टोजी
for this *bhakti is *ajbhakti in-
stead of which the word स्वरभक्तिः
is found in the Pratisºkhya works;
cf. यत्तद्रफात्परं भक्तस्तन ब्यवहितत्वानं
प्राप्नेति | ...... यच्चात्र रेफात्परं भुङ्क्तेर्न
कचिदपि व्यपवृक्तं दृश्यते | M. Bh. on P.
VIII. 4.1 Vart 2: cf. स्वरभक्तिः:
पूर्वभागक्षराङ्क R. Pr. I. 17; also cf.
रफात्स्वरापह्विताद् व्यञ्जनेीद्याद् ऋकारवर्णीं स्वरभ-
क्तिरुत्तरा ) R. Pr. VI. 13.
भक्षित lit, eaten up: a fault in pro-
nunciation when a letter is so
hurriedly pronounced that it
appears to have been dropped.
restriction regarding
edibles of a particular kind. The
word is quoted to illustrate the
नियमविधि or restrictive rule in gra-
mmar. Although the restriction in
the instance पञ्च पञ्चनखा भक्ष्याः is of
the kind of परिसंख्या and called
परिसंख्या, and not नियम, by the Mima-
rhsakas, the grammarians call it
a niyamavidhi. There is no परि-
संख्याविधि according to grammarians;
they cite only two kinds of vidhi
viz. simple vidhi or aptirva vidhi
and niyamavidhi.
भीजी surnamed Diksita; a stalwart )
grammarian of the Pahini system
who fiourished in the first half 0f
the seventeenth century and wr0te
many independent books and com-
mentaries such as the Siddhanta-
kaumudi, the Praudhamanorama,
the , Vaiyakaranasiddhantakarik,
the Sabdakaustubha and others.
The most reputed work out of
these, however, is the Siddhanta-
kaumudi which is very popular
even today and which has almost
set aside other works of its kind
such as the Prakriyakaumudi and
others. Bhattoj was a Telagu
Brahmana, as generally believed,
and although he belonged to the

भ्मत्व
269
भविष्यन्ती
भरतमछ a grammarian
South, he made Varanas his home
where he prepared a school of
learned Grammarians. Although |
he carried on his work silently in
Varanasi, he was envied by the
reputed rhetorician of his time
Pandita Jagannātha, who criticised
his work ( Bhattojis work ) named
Manorama very severely. See
मैौढमनेोरमा above. ' The Siddhānta-
kaumud has got many comme-
ntaries of which the Tattvabodhin
written by Bhattoji's pupil Jane-
Bdrasarasvat is appreciatedmuch
by learned grammarians.
*मत्व !he nature or quality of being
called भ which causes fmany gram-
मmatical operations which afegiven
together by Panini in VI. 4.129 to
179 See the word भ above.
of Bengal
wh9 liyed in the sixteenth century
and who wrote उपसर्गवृत्ति, दुतबोध and
other works on grammar
भर्गादि a class of words headea by भर्ग
which are generally names of
countries, the taddhita affixes अणु
and others added to which are not
Slided e. g. भागीं, कैकेयी, काश्मीरी: cf.
Ks. on IV. 1.178.
भर्तृहरि a very distinguished Gra-
mmarian who lived in the seventh
century A. D. He was a senior
contemporary of the authors of the
Kasik, who have mentioned his
famouswork viz. The Vakyapadya
in the Ksika.cf इाब्दार्थसंबन्ध्यं प्रकरणम्
वाक्यपदीयम् Kas. on P. IV.3.88. H
Vyakarana work * the Vakyapa-
diya' has occupied a very proini-
nent position in Grammatical Lite-
rature. The work is divided into
three sections known by the name
* S्da ' and it has discussed so
thoroughly the problem of the rela-
tion of word to its sense that sub-.
sequent grammarians have looked
upon his view as an authority.
The work is well-known for ex-
pounding also the Philosophy of
Grammar. His another work ** the
Mahabhasya-Dipika * is a scho-
larly commentary on Patanjalis
Mahabhasya. The Commentary is
not published as yet, and its soli-
tary manuscript is very carelessly
written. Nothing is known about
the birth-place or nationality of
Bhartrhari. It is also doubtful
whether he was the same person
as king Bhartphari who wrote the
* Satakatraya ?.
भवत् ( भवन्त् ) ancient term for the
present tense found in the Brha-
ddevat and other works, The
term * vartaman ' for the present
tense was also equally common.
The word is found in the Mahऋ-
bhasya, the Undisutravrtti of
Uijvaladatta and in the Grammar
of Jainendra cf. P.II.3.1 Vart 11,
Unadi III. 50 Jain Vyak. I.1.471.
'भवदेव a scholar of grammar who has
written a commentary on the
Bhacchabdaratna of Hari Dºksita.
भवन्ती ancient term for the present
tense or लट् according to Panini cf.
अस्तिर्भवन्तीपरः प्रथमपुरुषः अप्रयुज्यमानेप्यस्ति
M. Bh. on P. II.3.1 . Vart. 4: cf.
aiso प्रवृत्तस्याविराम ，ासितव्या भवन्ती ' इहृ-
धीमहं | इहृ वसाम: 1 इदं पुष्यमित्रे याजयामः !
M. Bh. on P. III. 2.123. See भवत्
( भवन्त् ).
भविष्यत् ancient term for the future
tense in general; cf. भविष्यति गम्यादयः !
भविष्यतोद्यनद्यतन उपसंख्यानम् P. III.3.3
Vart.l : cf.also the words भविष्यत्काल,
भविष्यत्त्रातेध, भविष्यदधिक्रार.
भविष्यन्ती ancient term for the future
tense in general; cf. परिदेवने श्वस्तंनी
भविष्यन्त्यर्थे P. III.3.15. Vart.1, cf.
also Kat. III.1.15: Hem. III. 3:15.

भष्ट्
&
भष् short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the con-
sonants भ , घ .. धु ; ( f एक्चे दरो
भब्o P. VHII.2.37.
भ|्भाव [he substitution of the third
consonants respectively for the
fourth consonants भ्, घ्, ढ and ध्;
cf. P. VI.1.13 Vrt. 13.
भखादि a class of words headed by
the word भस्त्रा to which the tad.
affix इक ( ष्ठन् ) is added in the
sense of * carrying by ' ; e. g.
भखित्रक, भस्त्रिक्री cfKas. on P.IV.4.16.
भसंज्ञा the term भ applied to the
noun-base in contrast with the
term पद.for details see the word भ.
भागवत इरिज्ञााख्त्री a modern scholar of
grammar who has written a com-
mentary named Vakyarthacandrik
on the Paribhagendusekhara of
Nagesa; he lived in the first half
of the eighteenth century.
भागवृत्ति one of the oldest commen-
taries on the Sitras of Panini,
which, although not available at
present, has been profusely guoted
by PuruSottamadeva and other'
Eastern Grammarians of the
twelfth and later centuries. The
authorship of the work is attribut-
ed to Bhartrhari, but the point is
doubtful as Siradeva in his Pari-
bhasvrtti on Pari. 76 has stated
that the author of the Bhagavrtti
has quoted from Maghakvya; cf.
अत एवं तत्रैव सूत्रे भागंवृतिः पुरातनमुनमुनित-
मिति पुरातनीनेदरिति च प्रमादपाठावेतौ गतानु-
गतिकतया कवयः प्रयुञ्जते न तेषां लक्षण चक्षुरिति !
Some scholars attribute its author-
ship to Wimalamati. Whosoevcr
be the author, the gloss ( भागवृत्ति )
was a work of recognised , merit:
cf. काशिकाभगवृक्येोश्चेतू सिद्धान्तं धेनुमस्ति धी:
तदा विचिन्त्यतां भातभीषावृत्तिरियं मंम Bh-
8avrtti at the end. सृष्टिघर in his
commentary . on ， the º Bhagavrtti
also says " सेा हि द्वयोर्विवर्कत्रीं.''
270
भाव
भाण्डारकर [ Sir Ramakrishna Gopal
Bhandarkar 1837-1925 A. D. ] a
well-known scholar of Sanskrit
Grammar who has written learned
articles on many grammatical
topics. He was a distinguished
Professor of Sanskrit in the latter
half of the nineteenth century.
He was one of the pioneers of
Sanskrit studies in India.
भारद्वाज (1) an ancient grammarian
quoted by Panini in his rules to
show differences of opinion; cf.क्रती
भारद्वाजस्य VII. 2.63; (2) name of a
country in the days of Panini cf.
कृकणपर्णाद्भारद्वाज P. IV. 2.145,
भारद्धाञ्जीय scholars and grammarians
belonging to or following the Bh-
radwaja School of Grammar whose
views are often guoted in the
Mahabhasya; भारद्वाजीयाः पठन्ति M.
Bh. on P. I.1.20Vart. 1, I.1.56
Vart.1l : I.2.22 Vart.3: I.3.67 Vart.
4, III.}.38 Vart.l, III 1.48 Vart.
3; III 1.89 Vart, 1, IV.1.79, VI.4.
47 and WI.4.155.
भव (1 ) becoming: existence. The
word is used many times in the
sense of धात्वर्थ- the sense of a root
which is # incomplete activity ' or
* process of evolving ?; cf. तदाख्यातं
येन भावं स धातु: R. Pr. XII. 5: cf.
also षड् भावांबेकारा भवन्ति Nir. I. 36;
, ' पूर्वापरीभूतं भावमाख्यातेन आचरि त्रजतिपचती-
' त्युपक्रमप्रभृति अपवर्गपर्यन्तम् Nir. I. 1 ; (2)
. activity as opposed to instru-
ments ( साधन or कारक ); cf. भाव-
, गहृयाम् " धात्वर्थगहृद्भ्याम् Ks. on P.
III. 1.24: cf. also भावः क्रिया, Kas.on
यस्य च भावेन भावलक्षणम् P. II. 3.37: (3)
, , completed action which is shown,
. not by a verb, but by .a verbal
derivative noun: cf. घ्वर्थश्च धातु-
नैवोच्यते , यस्तस्य सिद्धता नाम धर्मस्तत्र घञ्जादयः
' प्रत्यया विधीयन्त Kas..on * भावे * P. III.
3.18; cf. also कुदभिहितेो भावो द्रव्यखद्भवति

भावकर्वक 271
भावसन्
M. Bh. on P. II. 2.}9, III. 1.67,
IV. 1.3, V. 4.19; cf. also भावस्त्वेक:
M. Bh. on P. III. 1.67; (4) the
radical factor for the use of a
word; प्रवृत्तिनिमित्त; cf. भवतोमादभि-
धानप्रत्ययै इति भावः | दाब्दस्य प्रवृत्तिनिाभत्तं
भावदावेदेनोच्यते | अश्वत्वम् , अश्वता | Kas,
on P. 5.1.1 19; (5) thing, object
cf सिद्ध्ाब्दः कूटस्थेषु भावेष्वविचालिषु वर्तते
M. Bh. I. 1. Ahnika l; (6) trans-
formation, substitution; change
into the nature of another; cf. तत्र
प्रथमास्तृतीयभावम् R. Pr. II. 4. cf. also
the words मूर्धन्यभाव, अभिनिधानभाव |
etc. {7) possession of the qualities,
nature; तदर्थस्य भाव: तादथ्र्यम्: M. Bh. ]
on P. II. 3.13; (8) relationship: ;
cf. नभाव, प्रकृतिविकृतिभाव etc.
मार्क for its subject a
werbal derivative in the sense of
the भाव or the root activity. The
word भाववचन is explained as
भावकतृक in the Kasikavrtti. e. g.
the word रेग: in चौरस्य रुजति रोर्गः
Kas. on P. II. 8. 54: cf. भाववचनानां
भावकतृकाणां K. on * II. 3.54.
भावदीप name of a commentary on
the Sabdakaustubha by कृष्णमिश्र.
भवदेव a grammarian who has
written a commentary on the
Brhacchabdaratna ofHari Dºksita:
possibly the same as भवदेव.See भवदव.
भावना effort, activity.
भावप्रकारा name of a commentary
on the शब्दकौस्तुभ byवैद्यनाथ पाय्गुण्ड.
भIवप्रत्यय an affix in the sense ofgua-
lity such as त्व, ता etc.; cf. न ह्यन्तरेण
भावप्रत्ययं गुणप्रधाने भवति निर्दा:.
भावप्रधान description of a verb or
verbal form in which activity
plays the main part as opposed
to a noun in which completed
activity ( सत्व ) is predominant.
भावभेद् the different activities such
as igniting a hearth,	placing a
rice-pot on it, pouring water in
it etc., which form the different
parts of the main activity viz.
cooking cf उक्तो भावभदं भाष्ये M.
Bh. on P. III. 3.19, III. 4.67.
भाववचन (1) expressive ofभाव or the
completed verbal activity; e.g. the
word भाव itself, as also कृती, राग, and
others; (2) having for theirsubject
a verbal derivative in the form of
the verbal activity. See भावकतृक.
_K
भावांवेकार kinds of verbal activity
which are described to be six in
number viz. production, existence,
transformation, growth, decay and
destruction. These six modes of
existence first mentioned by Vars-
yyai and quoted by Yaska are
explained philosophically by
Bhartrhari as a mere appearance
of the Sabdabrahman or Satta
when one of its own powers, the
time factor ( कालदाक्ति ) is superim-
posed upon it, and as a result of
that superimposition, it (i.e. the
Sabdabrahman) appears as a pro-
cess; cf. षड् भावावेकारा भवन्ति इति वाष्य-
यणि: ' जायते अस्ति विपरिणमते वर्धते अपक्षीयते
विनद्यति इति । Nir,I.2; cf. also Wak-
yapadya III.30.
भावार्मन् the author of the कातन्त्रपरि-
भाषावृत, a work on the Paribhss
in grammar which are utilized
in explaining ,the rules of the
कातन्त्रव्याकरण by Sarvavarman.
भावसाधन (l) a word in the sense of
माव or completed verbal activity
अस्ति भावसाधने विधिशब्दः · विधानं विधिरिति
M. Bh. on P. I.1.57; (2) an affix
applied for the formation of a
word in the sense of verbal acti-
vity; cf. प्रयतनं प्रयत्नः | प्रपूर्वाद्यत्तेभ-
वसाधनो नङ्ग् प्रत्ययः M. Bh. on I.1.9.
भावसेन a grammarian of the Katan-
tra school who wrote the works
Katantrarupamala and Kaumara
Vyakarana.

भावित
भावित designated by a technical
term: cf. किं पुनरिदं तद्वावेतगृह्यतां बुद्धिर्येवं
च आक्ररेकारकारो विहिता भाब्यनेत तेषां ग्रहणं
आर्होस्विद् आदेज्मात्रस्य, M.Bh.on P.. 1.
भावेन् which is to come into being:
of future time: cf. भावि इत्यमीर्तीत्
M. Bh. on III. 4. 1: cf. भावेन: सुट
अदो विधीयत M.Bh. on P. VII. 1-
33; cf also एवं तर्हि भाविनीयं संज्ञा
विज्ञास्यत M.Bh on P. I. ].45.
भावेप्रयेाग impersonal form of a
sentence when there is no activity
mentioned on the part of the agent
nor resulting upon the object,
but there is a mere mention of
verb-activity.
भाव्य that which is to be produced;
cf.]ain. Vyak. I.1.72. See भाव्यमान,
भाव्यमानःlit, which is to be produc-
ed: which is prescribed by a rule,
like an affix; hence, an affix or an
augment or a substitute prescribed
bya rule as contrasted with the
conditions or the original wording
for which something is substituted,
or after which an affix is placed,
or to which an addition is made,
or which is deleted: cf भाव्यमानेन
सवर्णानां'ग्रहृणं न Par. Sek. Pari, 19;
also cf. M.Bh. on P.I. 1.50, I.1.
69,VI.1.85, VI.4.160.
भाषा spoken language as opposed to
the archaic Vedic Language; cf.
भाषायां सदवसश्रुवः:P.III2.108:प्रत्यये भाषायां
नित्यम् . P. VIII. 4, 45 Vart. I : cf.
also R. T. 96, 212; cf also नेति
प्रतिषेधार्थाये भाषायाम् , उभयमन्वध्यायम् Nir.
I.4.
भाषानुशासन a work on
attributed to य:कवि.
भाषांमञ्जरी a small treatise on gram*
mar written by Vyankata Subba-
Shastri.
भाषावृत्ति a short gloss on the Asidh-
yay of Panini in the l2th century
language
272
भाष्य
by Purusottamadeva, a reputed
scholar belonging to the Eastern
school of grammarians which
flourished in Bengal and Behar in
the 10th, 11th and 12th centuries,
The gloss is very useful for begi-
nners and it has given a clear
explanation of the different stras
without going into difficult mice-
ties and discussions. The treatise
does not comment upon Wedic
portions or rules referring to Vedic
Language because, as the legend
goes, king Laksmana Sena, for
whom the gloss was written, was
not qualified to understand Vedic
Language; cf. वैदिकभाषानर्हत्वात् Com.
on Bhagavrtti by Srsidhara.
There is a popular evaluation
of the Bhavrtti given by the
author himself in the stan2a
* काढिाकाभागवृत्त्योश्चत्सिद्धान्तं बोडुमस्ति धीः !
तदा विचिन्त्यतां भ्रातर्भोषावृत्तिरियं मम् ?
at the end ofhis treatise; for de-
tails see पुरुषोत्तमदेव.
भाषावृत्तिटीका a learned commentary
on Purusottamadeva's Bhasavrtti
by Srstidhara a learned gramma-
rian of the sixteenth century.
भाषिक belonging to, or used in spoken
language as contrasted with the
Vedic Language or निगम; cf. अथापि
भाषिकेभ्यो धातुभ्यो नैगमाः कृतो भाष्यन्ते Nir.
II.2.
भाषितपुंस्क a word or a noun-base
which has the same sense in the
masculine gender as in the neuter
gender: generally words ofquality
or adjectives like ढाच, मधु etc. fall
in this category;cf तृतीयादिषु भाषितपुंस्कं
पुंवद्भालवस्य P. VII. 1. 74;T cf. also
भाषितः पुमान् यस्मिन्नर्थे प्रवृत्तिानिमित्त स भाषित-
पुरुकशब्दनेच्यते | तद्योगादाभधेयमपि यत्नपुसकं
तदपि भाषित्पुरुकम् तस्य प्रतिपादकं यच्छब्दरूपं
तदपि भाषितपुंस्कम् | Ks. on VII.1.74.
भाष्य a learned commentary on an
original work, of recognised merit

भाष्यकार
and scholarship, for which people
have got a sense of sanctity in
their mind; generally every Sutra
work of a branch of technical
learning (or Sastra) in Sanskrit has
got a Bhasya written on it by a
scholar of recognised merit. Out
of the various Bhasya works of the
kind given above, the Bhasya on
the Vyakaraha stºtras of Panini is
called the Mahabhasya, on the
nature of which possibly the
following definition is based *सूत्रार्थ
- वण्र्यते यत्र पदैः सूत्रानुकारिभिः | स्वपदान व
वण्येनेत भाष्यं भाष्यावेदो विदुः '. In
books on Sanskrit Grammar the
word भाष्य is used always for the
MahabhSya. The word भाष्य is
sometimes used in the Mahabhasya
of Patafijali (cf. उक्तो भाबभदे भाष्य
III.3.19, IV.4.67) where the
word may refer to a work like
लडभाष्य which Patanjali nay have
Written, or may have got available
to him as written by somebody
else, before he wrote the Maha-
bhsya.
भाष्यकार Patajali, the author of the
Patafjala Mahabhasya; the term,
in this sense, frequently occurs in
works om Grammar. See भाग्य.
भाष्यस्त्र the brief pithy statements in
the Mahabhasya of the type of the
Sutras or the Varttikas. These
assertions or statements are named
*isti" also.
भाष्येष्टि the brief pithy assertions or
. injunctions of the type of Sutras
given by Patajali in a way to
supplement the Sutras of Phini
and the Warttikas thereon. See the
word इष्टि above and the word
भाष्यसूत्र also.
मास्करशाखी surnamed Abhyankar
(1785-1870) a great grammarian
in the line of the pupils of Nagesa
35
273
भुक्त
who was educated at Poona and
lived at Satar. He taught many
pupils, a large number of whom
helped the spread of Vyakarana
studies even in distant places of
the country, such as Varanasi and
others. For details see Vyakarana
Mahabhasya Vol. VII pp. 27-29,
D. E. Society's Edition.
भिक्षादि a class of words headed by
the word भिक्षा to which the tad,
affix अ ( अण् ) is added in the
sense of collection;e.g. भेक्षम्,यौवतम्,
पादातम्: cf. Kas. on P. IV.2.38.
भिदादि a class of roots headed by the
root भिद् to which the krt affix अ
(always in the fem. gender as अा )
is added in the sense of verbal
activity: e.g. भिदा, गुह्या, श्रद्धा, मघा
etc. cf Kas. on P. III. 3.104.
भिस् affix of the instrumental plural
before which the base is looked
upon as a Pada and sometimes
Split up in the Padaptha, especi-
ally when the preceding word has
got no change for its last letter or
syllable.
भीमभट्ट writer of the commentary,
named मैमी after him, on the
Paribhasendusekhara of Nagesa.
भीमसेन called भीमदास also, who Hou-
rished in the fourteenth century
and wrote a treatise on grammar
called भमव्याकरण.
भीमादि a class of words headed by
the word भीम in which the Unadi
affixes म and others, as prescribed
by specific Umadi sitras, are found
added in the sense of the fapadana? '
case-relation; e.g. भीमः in the sense
* बिभेति अस्मात्'. Similarly भीष्मः, भुम:,
रज: etc. cf. KS. on P.III.4.74.
भुक्त lit. swallowed or eaten up; the
term is used in connection with
letters that are uttered imperfect-

भु ू
274
भद्य
ly on account of the proximity of
similar letters.
|
I
|
referrcdto; cf बहेनेन्वदुत्तरपदभून्न P.
WI.2.175.
भुग्न name of a Sarhdhi or coalescence | भूमादि the limited senses भूमन् (plu-
given by the writers
Pratisakhya works where the diph-
thong vowels ओ and ओ, followed
by any vowel which is not labial,
are turned respectively into अद्
and अव्: e. g. ऋतेन मित्रावरुणावृतावृधुा-
वृतस्पृशा (R. Sarhh.I..2.8); cf ओष्ठय्ये-
न्योर्भग्नमनीष्ठये वकारोत्रान्तरागमः ' यथा ऋतेन
मित्रावरुणावृतावृधावृतस्पृशा | अनुष्ठेय इति
किम् | बायीं उक्थभि: 2.2. (R.Sarhh.
I.2.2). इत्यतः बाय उक्थेभि cf. R. Pr, .
II.11.
भूत lit, what has become or happen-
ed, The word is used in books on
grammar in the sense of past
tense in general, which has been
subdivided into (a) unseen past
(परीक्षभुत or लिट् ), (b) past, not of to-
day ( अनद्यतनभूत or लङ्क ) and (c)
past in general (सामान्यभूत or ठड्),cf.
भूत P.III.2.84, परोक्षे लिट् P.III.2.116
' and अनद्यतन लङ्क P.III.2.111.
भूतपूर्वगति lit. denotation of some-
thing which formerly was existing;
a consideration of that form of a
word which was formerly present.
The word is used frequently by
commentators when they try to ap-
plya rule ofgrammar toa changed
wording under the plea that the ;
wording required by the rule )
मेदक (l) lit. distinguishing; diffe-
was formerly there:	cf. भूतपूर्वगत्या
(पकारलेपे कृतेपि ) दाप् भविष्यति, M. Bh.
on P.I.1.20 Wart. 9; cf.
, Par. Sek. Pari. 76.
भूप|द् name popularly given by
Sradeva and 6ther grammarians
to the third pada of the first |
Astadhyay |
as it begins with the Sutra भूवादये '
adhyaya of Paninis
घातव: P.I.3.1.
भूमन plurality of the individuals |
of the ;
also M. |.
Bh. on P.I.1.56, WII.1.9 and VII. |.
3.108: cf also सांप्रतिकाभावे भूतपूर्वगतिः |
rality) and others in which मतु
and other possessive taddhia
affixes should take place,and not in
thegeneralsense of the presence at
one place as also *the possession by
some one individual;' cf. भूमनिन्दा-
प्रशंसासु नित्ययेोगतिदायने यः संसर्गेस्तिविवक्षायां
भवन्ति मतुबादय: M. Bh. on V. 2.94.
भूवादि lit headed by भू , or headed
by भू and वा as some scholars like
to explain; the term means roots;
in general, which have भू as the
first root in Painis list of roots;
cf. भूवादये धातव: P. I. 3.1: The
word भूवादे denoting roots stands
in contrast with the word भ्वादि
which stands for the roots of the
first conjugation. भूवादीनां वकारोये
मङ्गलार्थः प्रयुज्यते | भुवो वार्थं वदन्तीति भ्वर्था
वा वादयः स्मृता: KaS, on P. I. 3.1.
भृशादि a class of nouns headed by
भृदा to which the denominative
affix य is added in the sense of
* being or becoming what they
were not before;' e. g. अभृशो भृशो
भवति भ्दायते; similarly ，शीव्रायत, मन्दायते,
उन्मनायते, दुर्मनायते etc.cf.Kas.III.1.I3.
_ _ - -__-
भे ， difference, differentiation; .cf.
सति भदे र्किविंत्समानमिति कृत्वा संवर्णसंज्ञा
भविष्यति M. Bh. on P. I.1.9, Vart. 2.
rentiating: cf भेदकत्वात्स्वरस्य | भेदका
उदात्तादय: | M. Bh. on P. I. 1.!
Vart. 13; (2) adjective; cf. भदकं
विशेषणं भेद्यं विशेष्यम् Ks. on P. II:
1.57; (3) variety; kind; cf. सामान्यस्य
विशेषें भेदकः प्रकार: KaS. on P.V. 8.23;
(4) indicating, suggesting, as con-
trasted with वाचक: cf. संबन्धस्य तु
भेदक: Vakyapadya.
भेद्य that which is distinguished; the
word which is qualified; cf. भेयं
विंदाष्यम् Kas. on P. II. 1.57.

भेमव्याकरण 275 भ्रष्टावसर
S ;.. ' charities and love of learning.
भमव्याकरण a grammar treatise ; _ _
written by भीमसन in the fourteenth ! He fourished in the. eleventh
century A. D. | century A. D. He is said to have
&
मैमीं name of a commentary on the
Paribhsendusekhara of Nagesa
written by Bhimabhatta in the
iatter half of the eighteenth cen-
tury.
मिश्र one of the reputed gra-
mmarians of the latter half of the
eighteenth century and the first
half of the mineteenth century who '
wrote commentaries on several
prominent works on grammar. He
vas the son of भवदेव and his native ;
place was Prayºga. He has
written the commentary called
Candrakala on the Laghusab-
dendusekhara, Pariksa on the
Vaiyakaranabhsanasara, Gada
called also Bhairav or Bhairavi-
gada on the Paribhasendusekhara
and commentaries ( popularly
named Bhairavi) on the Sabda-
ratna and Linganussana. He is
reported to have visited Poona,
the capital of the Pesawas and
received magnificent gifts for
exceptional proficiency in Nyaya
and Vyakarana. For details see
pp. 24 and 25 Vol. VI . Pata-
jala Mahabhasya D. E, Society's
SN Edition.
भेरवी name given to a commentary
in general written by Bhairava-
miSra, which see above. The
commentary on the ParibhaSen-
dusekhara is more popularly
known as Bhairavº.
भोगीनर् tad. affix मेागीनर् suggested
by the Varttikakra to form
words like राजभोगनि, अाचार्यभेीरीिन
which are derived by the rule
आत्मन्विश्वजनभेोगोत्तरपदात् ख: P. V. 1.9.
भोज the well-known king of Dhara
who was very famous for his
got written or himself written
several treatises on various Sastras.
The work Sarasvatikanthabharana
which is based on the Astadhyayi
of Panini, but which has included
in it the Varttikas and Paribhass
also, has become in a way a
Vyakarana or a general work in
grammar and can be styled as
Bhoja-Vyakaraja. _
भोलानाथ a grammarian who has
written a commentary named
Sarhdarbhamrta on Bopadeva's
Mugdhabodha.
भीतपूर्वं the consideration that a
thing was such and such a one
formerly, and hence liable to
undergo .grammatical operations
on that ground , cf. कुत एत्वै भौत-
पूर्वात् | भिस एकि	M. Bh. on P.
VII. 1. 9. *
भींवादिक belonging to the class of
roots headed by भू: a root of the
first conjugation cf. अत् व्याप्तौ
भोवादिक: Kas. on P. III. 1.75.
भ्यस् case-affix of the dative and
ablative plural: cf. स्वेौजसमौट्> P
IV. 1. 2.
भ्याम् case-affix of the instrumental,
dative and ablative dual; cf.
स्वौजसमौट्s P. IV. 1. 2.
भ्रटच् tad. affix भ्रट applied to the
prefix अव in the sense of depres-
sion of the nose: e.g. अवभ्रटः पुरुष::
अवभ्रटा नासिका अवभ्रटम् (depression Gf
the nose नासिकाया नतत्वम्);cf. Kas. on
नत नासिकायाः संज्ञायां टीटङ्क नाटजु भ्रटच:
P. V. 2.31.
भ्रष्टावसर lit. a person or a thing of
which the proper occasion has
passed; theword is used in conne-
ction with the application- pf a
rule even though the proper time

भ्राज
of its application isgone, on the
analogy of a man who is paid.his
Daksina although the proper time
has gone ( भ्रष्टावसरन्यायेन दक्षिणा दीयते);
cf. नच पुनर्मुक्तास्त्रं प्रवर्तते भ्रष्टावसरत्वात्
KaS. on P. V[1.2.101.
भ्राज stray or spurious verses or
stanzas whose authorship cannot
be traced, butwhich are common-
ly guoted by scholars; cf. भ्राज
नाम श्लेाका: M.Bh. on I.1 Ahnika 1;
the word भ्राज is explained as
*composed by Katyyana by
Nagesabhatta in his Uddyota.
मध्य iit.centre of the brows, or eye-
brows which is described as the
place of air ( which produces
utterance or speech) at the time
of the evening soma-pressing or
sacrifice: cf. प्रात:सवनमाध्यन्दिनसवनतृती-
यसवनक्रमेण उर:कण्ठभ्रमध्यानि त्रीणि स्थानानि
वायोर्भवन्ति	Vaj. Prt. I. 30; cf. also
भुवेर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक्.
भ्वादिगण the class of roots headed by
भू; the first conjugation of roots.
म
मt (1) fifth letter of the labial class
of consonants which is possessed
of the properties नादानुप्रदानं, घोष,
कण्ठसंवृतत्व, अल्पप्राणत्व and अानुनासिक्य:
(2) substitute म् ( मनः ) for अम् of
the 1st. pers. sing. in Vedic litera..
ture: e.g. वधीं वृत्रम्	cl. अमे म् P.
VII, 1.40;
श्， (l) the consonant म् with the vowel
अ added for facility of utterance;
cf T. Fr. I.2.! ; (2) The substi-
tute म for मस्र of the 1st pers.
pl. in the perfect tense cf.
P परस्मैपदानां ... णल्वमाः III. 4.82
and in the present tense also in
the case of the root विद्: (3) tad.
afix म added to the word ' मध्य in
the Saijika senses,and to the words
276
मञ्जूषा
and दु in the sense of possession;
cf. P.IV.3.8,V.2. 108.
मकरन्द् (1)name of a commentary by
Rafganatha on the Padamafijai
of Haradatta: (2) name of a com-
mentary on the Supadma Vyaka-
rana by VisnumiSra.
मकार the consonant म् with the vowel
अ and the affix कार added for faci-
lity of use and pronunciation: cf.
T.Pr.I.17 and 21.
मङ्गलार्थे for the sake of auspicious-
ness at the beginning of a treatise
or work: cf. भूवादीनां वकारोयं मङ्गलार्थः
प्रयुज्यत M.Bh. on P.I.3.1.;cf.मङ्गलादीनि
हृि इास्त्राणि | M.Bh. on P.I.1.1.
मट् tad. affix म applied to a numeral,
not preceded by another numeral
in the sense of completion: e. g.
पञ्चम:, सतम:; cf. नान्तादसंख्यादेर्मट् Pan.
V.2.49.
मण् tad. affix म, causing vrddhi for
the word मध्य, in the sense of
*present therein' ( तत्र भवः ): e.g.
माध्यम:: cf. मण्मीयो वापि प्रत्ययौ, P.IV.
3.60 Vart. 2.
मण्ङ्कगति lit.the gait of afrog: jump;
the continuation of a word from a
preceding Sutra to the following
Sप्itra or Sutras in the manner of a
frog by omitting one or more Sutras
in the middle; the word मेण्ड्कप्लुति
is also used in the same sense espe-
cially by later grammarians cf.
अथवा मण्डूकगतयेधिकाराः | यथा मण्डूका
उत्प्लुत्येत्प्लुत्ये गच्छन्ति तद्वदाधकाराः [ M.
Bh. on P.i.1.3 Vart.2, II. 3.32, II.
4.34, VI.1.16, VI.3.49,VII. 2.117.
मण्ङ्कळात thesame as मण्डूकगति which
see above: cf. अथवा मण्डूकप्लुतयेधिकाराः
MB.h. on P. V.2.4.
मञ्जूषt a popular name given to the
work परमलघुमञ्जूषा of Nagesa on अर्थ-
प्रक्रिया (science or method of inter-
pretation) in Wyakarana, which is

मतु
generally read by advanced :
students. Nagesa has also written ;
a bigger work on the same subject !
लघुमञ्जूषा which sometimes is also !
referred to by the word मञ्जूषा.
मठ the same as मतुप् a tad. affix
showing possession; the word is fre-
guently used in Panini's rules for
मतुप्. cf. मतीश्व बहुजङ्गात् | P. IV 2.72;
cf. also, P.IV. 4.125, 136: V. 2.59,
VI.1.215, VI.3.118,130:VIII. 2.9;
for the sense of मतु see मतुप् below.
The affix मतु (instead of मतुप् of
Panini) is found in the Atharva
Pratisakhya.
मठप् tad. affix मत् changed in some
cases to बत् (cf मादुपधायाश्च मतेर्वेs
यवादिभ्यः P. VIII. 2.9), applied to
any noun or substantive in the
sense of * who possesses that,' or
*which contains it,' or in the
sensc of possession as popularly
expressed. The affix is called
possessive affix also, and is very
commonly found in use: e. g.
गेीमान्, वृक्षवान् , यवमान् , etc. cf. तदस्यां-
स्त्यस्मिन्निति मतुप् P. .V. 2.94. The
very general sense of *possession'
is limited to certain kinds of pos-
session by the Warttikakara in the
following : stan2a: भूमरिनन्दाप्रशंसासु
नित्ययेोगतिदायन l संसर्गsस्तिविवक्षायां भवन्ति
मतुबादय: cf. Kas. on P. V. 2.94.
There are other tad. affixes pres-
cribed in the same sense as मतुप् ,
such as the affixes लच् (V. 2.96-
98), इलच् (99, 100, 105, 117), इा
and न (100), ण (101), विनि (102,
12I, I22), इनि (102, 115, 116,
128, 129-137), अण् (103, 104), उर्व्
(106),. र (107), म (108), व ( 109,
II0), ईरन् and ईरच् (111), वलख् (112,
113), ठन् (ll5, 116), ठमू (118, 119),
यप् (I20). युस् (123, 138, 140),
मनि (124), आलच् and आटड् (125,
अच् (127), and ब, भ, ड, ति, तु, त
277
and य् each one applied to spe-
मत्वर्थीय
cifically stated words. मतुप् is also
specially prescribed after the
words headed by रस (cf. रसादिभ्यश्च
P. V. 2.95) in supersession of
some of the other affixes men-
tioned above which would take
place in such cases, if मतु9 were
not prescribed by the rule रसा-
दिभ्यश्च. The portion of the Astadh-
yy prescribing the possessive affix-
es is named मतुबधिक्रार (P. W. 2.92
to 140).
मठप्पाद् a conventional name given
by grammarians to the third
pada of the eighth Adhyaya of
Panini's Astadhyay as the pada
begins with the sutra मतुवसेरु संबुद्धौ
छन्दसि P. VIII. 3.1.
मतुबर्थिक affix in the sense of मतुप्
i. e. in the sense of possession.
For these affixes of which इनि (इन्)
is very common see the word
मृतुप् , cf. शैषिकृन्मतुबर्थीयाच्छेषिकं मतुब-
र्थिक; | सरूप: प्रत्ययेो नप्ट: सन्नन्तान्न सनिष्यते |
* M. Bh. on III. 1.7: V. 2.94.
मतुबर्थाय affix in the sense of मतुप् ;
see मतुबर्थिक.
मतुब्लोप elision of the affix मतुप् spe-
cially prescribed after words of
guality, or words meaning gua-
lity, such as ढढ, कृष्ण which origi-
nally mean the white colour, the
black colour etc. e. g. बुढः पट: cf.
गुणवचनेभ्यो मतुपो लुक् P. V. 2. 94
Vart, 3._.
मतीन्मञ्जा name of a commentary on
Kondabhatta's Vaiyakaranabhप-
sana written by a grammarian
named वनमालेन.
मत्वर्थ sense in which the affix मतु
( मतुप् ) .is affixed; the sense of
'possession' in general; see the
word मतुप् above.
मत्वर्थीय an affix which has got the
sense of मठ ( मतुप् ). See the words
मतुबर्थक्र and मतुबर्थीय above, '

मध्य
278
मध्योदात्त
मध्य lit. middle: middling variety.
The word is used in the sense
of the middling effort between
the open ( विवृत ) and the close
( संवृत ) external efforts which
technically is called ह्यकार: cf. मध्य
हृकारः ， मध्ये भव: मध्यः | अ सांप्रतिके !
, तदयमर्थः , सांप्रतिके प्रकृतिस्थ कण्ठ सति हृकारो
नाम बाह्यः प्रयत्नः क्रियते , तेन च ब्यञ्जनेषु
धीषो जायते ( T. Pr. Bhasya on II.6.
मध्यकेौमुदी called also मध्यमक्रौमुदी a
work on grammar which is an
abridgment, to a certain extent,
of Bhattoj's Siddhantakaumudi.
The treatise was written by Vara-
darja, a pupil of Bhattoji for
facilitating the study of the
Siddhanta-kaumudi.
मध्यपतित lit. fallen in the middle;
the word is used generally in the
sense of an augment which is
inserted in the middle of a word.
Sometimes an affix too, ' like अक्व
' or a comjugational sign like क्षम् .
is placed in the middle of a
' word. Such a middling augment
is technically ignored
word together with it is taken as
the original word for grammatical
· operations; e. g. उच्चकै:, नचिकै: etc.
cf तन्मध्यपतितस्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यत Par. Sek.
Pari. 89.
मध्यम (1) the middle person ( मध्य-
मपुरुष ), cf. युष्मद्युपपदे... मध्यम: P. I.
4.105: cf. also Nir. WII. 7; (2)
middling tone or effort cf. मध्यमेन
स वाक्ययोग: T. Pr. XVIII. 4,
where the commentator explains
the word as उच्चनीचसमाहृारविलक्षण:
वाक्प्रयेोगः l the word मध्यमा. is used
in this sense as qualifying a
mode of utterance. वृति; cf.
अभ्यासार्थं दुतां वृत्तिं प्रयोगार्थं तु मध्यमाम् !
R. Pr. XIII. 19; cf also चतुष्कला
मध्यमायामं R. T. 32; (3) one of the
sewcn modes of speech or tones.
cf सत वाचः स्थानानि भवन्ति , उपांशुत्वान-
निमदेापदमन्मन्द्रमध्यमताराणि T. T p,.
XXIII.4 and 5 and also क्रणे मध्यमम्
KVIII. l l where the comment
tator explains मध्यम as यत्र कण्ठ स्थान
प्रयेोग उपलभ्यते तन्मृध्यमं नाम षष्ठं बाचस्स्थानेमं
(4) one of the seven musical
notes originating or proceeding
from the Svarita accent cf., स्वारत
प्रभवा हेत षड्जमध्यमपञ्चमाः Pan Sik..
मध्यमकौमुदी (l) name of a treatise on
grammar by Ramasarman: (2)
the same as मध्यकौमुदी.
मध्यमपदलीप lit. the dropping of the
middle word or member ( of a
compound generally) as for inst-
ance in शाकपार्थिक्र for ढाक्रप्रिय्पार्थिव:
the word मध्यमपदलेीप is also used
in the sense of a compound.
The compounds which have
the middle word dropped
are enumerated by the Warttika-
kara under the Warttika शाकपार्थिवा-
दीनां मध्यमपदलेापश्च Bh. Vr. II.1.60
Wart.; cf also Kat. II.6.30.
मध्यमा or मध्यमवृत्ति See मध्यम (2).
| मध्यासेद्धान्तकौमुर्दी See मध्यकौमु，.
and a |
मध्येपवाद् a rule forming an exception
to other general rules being plac-
ed between them, one or many
of which are placed before and the
others afterwards. Such a rule sets
aside the previous rules and not
the succeeding ones. The state-
ment laying down this dictum is
मध्येपवादाः पूर्वान् विधीन् बाधन्त नेतरान्
Par. Sek.Pari. 60, also M. Bh. on
P.VI.4.148 Vart. 5.
मध्येपवादन्याय the maxim of the
middle rule of exception; see
मधेयपवाद. -
मध्योदात्त the acute or udatta accent
to the मध्य vowel which is neither
the initial ( अादि) nor the final one
( अन्त ) as laid down by the .rule
उपेात्तमं रिति P. VI.1.217: cf. मध्ये-

मध्वादि 279
मयं
K
दात्तमपि यमिच्छति तत्र रेफमनुबन्धं करोति ;
M. Bh. on III.1.3.
मध्वादि a class of words headed by !
the word मधु to which the taddhita ,
affix मत् ( मतुप् ) is added as aCtu-
rarthika affix; e. g. मधुमान् , विसमान्
etc.; cf. KS. on P.IW. 2.86.
मन (1) the affix मनिन्generally found
in Wedic Literature added to
roots ending in अा and preceded
by a noun; e.g. सुदामा, अश्वत्थामा; cf.
अंतमनिदुर्विनिषेधे P.III.2.7475: |
(2) Undi affix in आद्य: cf. औद्य इति
उन्देरौणाादेके मन्प्रत्यय नलेपो गुणश्च निपात्येते
Ks. on P. WI.4.29. I
मनिन् See मन्.
मनीज्ञादि a class of words headed by
the word मनेीज्ञ, to which the tadd-
hita affix अक ( बुञ्ज) is added in the
sense of *nature or *duty': e.g.
मानीरक्रम् , काल्याणकम्, अाढयक्रम् etc. cf.
Kas. on P. V. 1.U33.
मनेोरम (I) the popular name given to
the commentary प्रौढमनेारमौ on the
Siddhantakaumud of भट्टोजीदीक्षित
by the author himself the com-
mentary is a scholarly one and
very extensive; and its first portion
only upto the end of Karaka is
bhatta and a commentary named
दबोद्धरण on Nagesas Paribhasendu-
Sekhara.
मन्त्र name given to the Sarhhit por-
tion of the Veda works especially
of the Rgveda and the Yajurveda
as different from the Brahmana,
Aranyaka and other portions of the
two Vedas as also from the other
Wedas;cf. मन्त्रशाब्द ऋक्शब्दे च यजु:शादे व;
M. Bh. on P.I. 1.68 Wrt. 4. The
word मन्त्र occurs several fimes in
the rules of Panini ( cf. P. II. 4.
80, III.2.71, III.3.96, VI. 1. 151,
VI.1.210, VI.3.131, VI.4.53, VI.
4.14l) and a few times in the
Warttikas. (cf. I. }l. 68Vart. 4,
IV.3.66 Vart. 5 and VI. 4. 141
Vart. 1). It is, however, doubt-
ful whether the word was used in
the limited sense by Panini and
Katyyana. Later on, the word
came to mean any sacred text or
even any mystic formula, which
was looked upon as sacred. Still
later on, the word came to mean a
secret counsel. For details see Gold-
suicker's Pahini p. 69, Thiemes
*Panini and the Veda ' p. 38.
genel ally read in the Sanskrit | मन्द्र onc of the three places of the
PathaSalas;(2) name of a commen-
[ tary on the Madhyasiddhanta-
kaumud by Ramasarman; (3)
name given to a treatise discussing
roots given in the Katantra Gra-
mmar written by रमानाथशर्मा in the
sixteenth century. The work is
origination of articulate speech
which is described as situated in
the throat cf त्रीणि मन्दं मध्यममुत्तमं च |
तेषु मन्द्रमुरसि वर्तते Uvvata on R. Pr.
KIII. 17; cf also मन्द्रमध्यमतारााण
स्थानानि भवन्ति | T.Pr.XXII.11.
called कातन्त्रधातुवृत्ति also. मन्नुदेव See मन्तुदेब.
e
मनोरमाकुचमर्दनnamegivenina banter- | मप् tad. afixम always added to the
ing tone to the treatise पेोढमनोरमा-
खण्डन written by जननाथपण्डित.
मन्तुदेव known also as मन्नुदेव, a famous
grammarian of the eighteenth
century who has written a com-
mentary named दर्पणा on the
Vaiyakaranabhप्5anasaraofKonda-
krt. affix त्रि ( द्वित्र) prescribed after
roots characterized by the mute
syllable ड: e.g. कृत्रिमम् , पवित्रमम् etc.
त्रेभेन्नित्यम् P.IV. 4.20. -
abbreviated term or pratyahara
for all the consonants of the five
classes or Vargas exceptingः the:

मंय
280 मंहाभाष्य
consonant ञ्ज: cf. मय उने वे वा
P.VIII.3.33.
मय tad. affix मयट् (1) in the sense of
proceeding therefrom ( तत आगत: P.
IV.3.92) added to words showing
cause or meaning human being;e.g.
सममयम् , देवदत्तमयम्: (2) in the sense
of product(विकार)or part(अवयव) add-
ed optionally with अणु to any wgrd,
e.g. अश्ममयम् , आश्मनम् मूर्वामयम् मौर्वम् ,
and necessarily to words beginn-
ing with आ, ए and औ, words
of the class headed by the
word इार and the words गेी, पिष्ट, व्रीहृि,
तिल and some others: cf. P. IW. 3.
143-150; (3) in the sense of pro-
portion, added to a numeral: e. g.
द्विमयमुदश्विद्यवानाम् ; cf. P. V. 2.47; (4)
in the sense of "made up of'added
to the thing of which there is a
large quantity; e.g. अलमयम् ,
अपूपमयम्cf;तत्रकृतवचने मयट्P.V.4.21,22.
मयद् see मय.
- a class of compounds
of the type of मयूरव्यंसक which are
somewhat irregular formationsand
hence mentioned as they are
found in use. The compounds are
called simple tatpurusa compo-
unds; e.g. मयूरव्यंसक्र: हुसेतण्ह्य, एहुिपत्वम् ,
उच्चावचम्, खादतमोदता etc.: cf. मयूरव्यं-
सकादयश्च P.II.1.72.
मरीस tad. affix मरीसच् added to the
word अवि in the sense of milk: e.g.
अविमरीसम् ; cf. अवेदुग्धे सेढदूसमरीसवः P.
V. 2.36 Vart. 5.
माळनाथ a reputed commentator on
many classical poetic and dra-
matic works, who fourished in
the fourteenth century. He was
a scholar of Grammar and is
believed to have written a com-
mentary on the Sabdendusekhara
and another named न्यासोद्योत on the
' न्यास of जिनन्द्रबुद्धि.
म， personal ending म् substituted
for अम् in Vedic Literature: e.g.
वधीं वृत्रम् ; cf. अमे मछ P. VII. 1.40;
See म्.
मस् personal ending of the first
person ( उत्तमपुरुष ) plural: e. g.
भवाम:, कुमे:; cf.तिप्तस्झिसिप्o III.4.78.
मस personal ending formed by
adding इ to मस् of the 1st person
( उत्तमपुरुष ) pl. in Vedic Literature
दीपयामसि, भञ्जयामसि, cf. Kas. on इद्न्ते
मसि P.WII.1.46.
महादेव a grammarian of the Katan-
tra school who has written a gloss
on the कातन्त्रवृति of दुर्गसिंहृ.
मदृनन्द a grammarian of the ejgh.
teenth century who has writter a
gloss on Kondabhatta's Vaiyka.
rajabhisanasara.
महान्यास mame of a commentary on
the Ksikavivaranapanjika (popu-
larly named Nysa), mentioned
by Ujjvaladatta in his Undi-
stravtti.
महाप्राण lit. hard breathing, aspirate
characteristic (बाह्यप्रयत्न) of conso-
mants possessed by the second and
fourth consonants of the five class-
es, and the sibilants ;ं, ष् and सु
which letters are also called महाप्राण
on that account.
महाभाष्य lit. the great commentary.
The word is uniformly used by
commentators and classical Sans-
krit writers for the reputed com-
mentary on Panini's Stras and
the Varttikas thereon by Patafijali
in the 2nd century B. C. The
commentary is very scholarly yet
very simple in style, and exhaus-
tive although omitting a number
of Panini's rules. It is the first and
oldest existing commentary on the
Asdhyay of Panini, and, in spite
of some other commentaries and
glosses and other compendia,
written later on to explain the

महाभाष्य
281
महाभाष्य
Sप्tras of Panini, it has remained
supremely authoritative and fur-
Bishes the last and final word in
all Places of doubt: cf. the remarks
इति भाष्ये स्थितम्, इत्युक्तं भाष्य, इत्युक्तमाकंर
etc. scattered here and there in
several Vyakarana treatises form-
ing in fact, the patent words used
by commentators when they finish
any chain of arguments. Besides
commenting on the
issues and after discussing them
fully and thoroughly, given his
conclusions which have become
the final dicta in those matters.
The work, in short, has become
an encyclopaedic one and hence
aptly called खनि or अक्रर. The
work is spread over such a wide
field of grammatical studies that
Bot a single grammatical issue
appears to have been left out.
The author appears to have made
a close study of the method and
explanations of the Sitras of
Panini given at various academies
all over the country and incorpo-
rated the gist of those studies
given in the form of Varttikas at
the various places, in his great
work He has thoroughly scruti-
pized and commented upon the
Varttikas many of which The has
approved, some of which he has
rejected, and a few of which he has
supplemented.Besides theVrttikas
which are referred to above, he has
Guoted stan2as which verity sum
up the arguments in explanation
of the difficult stºtras, composed
by his predecessors. There is a
good reason to believe that there
were small glosses or commenta-
ries on the Suitras of Pnniwritten
by learned teachers at the various
36 _
__ Sutras of ;
Paini, Patajali, the author, has
™aised many other grammatical
academies, and the Warttikas form-
ed in a way, a short pithy summary
of those glosses or Wrttis. . The
explanation of the word वृत्तौ साधु
वार्तिकम् given by Kaiyata may be
guoted in support of this point.
Kaiyata has at one place even
stated that the argument of the
Bhasyakra is in consonance with
that of Kui, his predecessor. The
wcrk is divided into eightyfive
sections which are given the name of
lesson or आहुिक्र by the author, pro-
bably because they form the subject
matter of one day's study each, if
the student has already made a
thorough study of the subject and
is very sharp in intelligence. cf.
अङ्का निवृत्तम् आह्निकम्, (the explanation
given by the commentatiors).Many
commentary works were written
on this magnum opus of Patafijali
during the long period of twenty
centuries upto this time under the
names टुक्रा टिप्पणी, दीपिक्रा, प्रक्राज्ञिक्रा,
ब्याख्या, रत्नावली, स्तूर्त, व्रात, प्रदीप,
व्याख्यानं and the like, but only one
of them the * Pradpa * of कैयटी-
पाध्याय, is found complete. The
learned commentary by Bhartp-
hari, written a few centuries before
the Pradipa, is available only in a
fragment and that.too, in a manu-
script form copied down from the
original one from time to time by
the scribes very carelessly. Two
other commentaries which are
comparatively modern, written by
Narayanasesa and Nilakantha are
available but they are also incom-
plete and in a manuscript form.
Possibly Kaiyatabhatta's Pradipa
threw into the background the
commentaries of his predecessors
and no grammarian after Kaiyata
dared write a commentary supe-
rior to Kaiyata's Pradipa or, if he

महाभाष्यदीपिका
began, he had to abandon his work
in the middle. The commentary of
Kaiyaa is such a scholarly one
and so written to the point that
later commentators have almost
identified the original Bhasya with
the commentary Pradipa and
many a time expressed the two
words Bhasya and Kaiyata in the
same breath as भाष्यकैयटयोः ( एतदुक्तम्
or स्पष्टमेतत् ).
महाभाष्यदीपिका a very learned old
commentary on the Mahabhasya
of Patajali written by the reput-
ed grammarian Bharthari or
Hari in the seventh century A. D.
The commentary has got only
ome manuscript preserved in Ger-
many available at present, of
which photostat copies or ordi-
mary copies are found here and
there. The first page of the
manuscript is missing and it is
incomplete also, the commentary
not going beyond the first seven
Bhnikas. For details see page
383 Vol. VII Vyakarana Maha-
bhasya D. E. Society's edition.
महाभाष्यप्रदीप a very scholarly com-
mentary on Patafijali's Mahabh-
Sya written by Kaiyatabhatta in
the eleventh century, The com-
mentary has so nicely explained
every difficult and obscure point
in the Mahabhasya, and has so
thoroughly explained each sen-
tence that the remark of later
grammarians that the torch of
the Mahabhasya has been kept
burning by the Pradpa appears
guite apt and justified. Kaiyaga's
commentary has thrown much
additional light on the original
arguments and statements in the
Mahabhasya. There is a learned
commentary on the Pradipa
written by Nagesabhatta which
282
महाभाष्यव्याख्या
is named fvivaraha by the author
but which is well known by the
name * Uddyota among students
and teachers of Wyakarana. For
details see pp. 389, 390 Vol VII,
Patafijala Mahabhasya, D. E. So-
ciety's Edition.
महाभाष्यप्रदीपटीकt name given to each
of the various commentaries on the
Pradipa of Kaiyata written by gra-
mmarians, out of which the com-
mentaries of चिन्तामणि, रामचन्द्रसरस्वती,
नारायण, नित्यानन्दपर्वतीय and one or
two more are available in a man-
uscript form and those too guite
incomplete.
महाभाष्यप्रदीपप्रकारा called also कैयटप्र-
काळा, name of the commentary on
the Pradipa of Kaiyata by Nilan-
kanthamakh a versatile writer
of the 17th century.
महाभाष्यप्रदीपविवरण (!) original name
of the learned commentary on
the *Pradipa of Kaiyata written
by NageSabhatta, a stalwart and
epoch-making grammarian of the
18th century. The commentary
is known popularly by the name
*Uddyota or Pradipoddyota; (2)
name of the commentary on
Kaiyatas Pradipa by Nityananda
Parvatiya. The commentary is
also known by the name दीपप्रभा.
महाभाष्यलधुति 1.ame given to the
short gloss on the Mahabhgya
written by the famous eastern
grammar-scholar Maitreya-Rak-
Sita of the twelfth century.
मदृभाष्यव्याख्या name given to each of
the explanatory glosses om the
Mahabhsya written by gram-
marians prominent of whom were
Purusottamadeva, Narayana Sesa,
Visnu, Nilakantha and others
whese fragmentary works exist in
a manuscript form.

मइमिश्र 288
मात्रा
महामिश्र name of a gran:marian who
wrote a commentary on Jinen-
drabuddhi's Nysa. The com-
mentary is known by the name
Vyakaraapraksa.
महाविभाषा a rule laying down an
option for several rules in a topic
by being present in every rule: cf.
मह्याद्विभाषया वाक्यमपि. विभाषा (P.II.1.1 l)
and समर्थानां प्रथमाद्वा (P. IV.1.82) are
some of the rules of this kind.
महासंज्ञा a long term, as contrasted
with the very short terms टि, बु,
भ, इत् and others introduced
by Panini in his grammar for
the sake of brevity. These long
terms such as सर्वनाम, अब्यय,
परस्मैपद, अात्मनेपद, and many other
were widely in use at the time of
P्ini and hence he could not
but pick them up in his grammar
in spite ofhis strenuous attempts at
brevity. The commentators, how-
ever, find out a motive for his
doing this viz. that appropriate
words only could be understood
by those terms and not others; cf.
महासंज्ञाकरणेन तदनुगुणानामेव अत्र संनिवद्भात् !
S. K. on सर्वादने सर्वेनामानि P. I.1.27.
माहेङ्ग personal ending of the Atmane-
pada first person (उत्तमपुरुष) plural;
cf. तिप्तस्झि ... वह्मिमहृिङ्क P. III.4.78.
महिष्यादि a cla3s of words headed by
the word महिषी to which the tad.
affix अ (अण्) is added in the sense
Of *proper for' ( धम्र्यम् ); e.g. माहिषम्
पौरोहितम् , हौत्रम्: cf. Kई,on P.IV.4.
48.
मईघर a grammarian of the sixtcenth
century who, besides many small
treatises on other subjects, wrote
a commentary on the Sarasvata-
Prakriya Vyakarana.
न्दिन a Jain Grammarian who
has written a work on the karaka
topic of grammar, named षट्कारक.
माक्षव्य name of an ancient writer of
Pratisakhya works mentioned in
the Rk Prtikhya: cf. R. Pr. I.2.
माचाक्रीय an ancient writer of a
in the Taittiriya Prtisakhya as
one, holding the view that य and
बु preceded by अ and followed
by उ and ओ respectively, are
dropped provided they stand at
the beginning of a Pada ( word )-
मान्वाक्रीय, who belonged to the
Yajurveda school, is said to have
held this view which is generally
held by the followers of the
Rgveda: cf. उकारौकारपरौ लुप्यते माचा-
क्रयस्य (T. Pr. X.29) on which the
commentator adds वहृवृचानामयं पक्षः.
_N
माणिक्यदेव a Jain writer who has
written a gloss on the Unadistras
consisting of ten chapters popu-
larly called उणादिसूत्रदशपादी.
vA
माण्ड्कंय name of an ancient writer
of a Pratishhya work referred to
in the Rk Pratikhya, cf. R.Pr.I.2.
मातृकावर्ण letters of the alphabet.
See अक्षरसमाम्नाय.
मात्रच् a tad. affix in the sense of
measure applied optionally with
द्वयस and दन to a noun e.g. ऊरुमात्रम्
प्रस्थमात्रम् ; cf. प्रमाणे द्वयसज्दघ्नञ्मात्रचः P.
V.2.37 and Kईika thereon which
remarks thai द्वयस and दन are
applied in the sense of height,
while मात्र is applied in the sense of
any measure: cf. प्रथमश्च द्वितीयश्च
ऊध्र्वमाने मतौ मम Kas. on P. V.2.37.
मात्रा (1) measure, quantity ; cf भवति
हिं तंत्र या च यावती च अर्थमात्रा M. Bh.
on P.I.2.45 and II.1.1 ; (2) mora,
prosodial unit of one instart i.e-
the length of time required to
pronounce a short vowel: cf. भूयसीं
मेात्रा इवर्णावर्णयेः, अल्पीयसी अवर्णस्य,M.Bh.
on I.1.48 Vart. 4: cf. मात्रा हुसुवस्तावद-
वग्रहान्तरं, द्व दीर्धः,तिस्रः प्रित उच्यते स्वरः

माधव 284
मित्
R. Pr.I.16: cf also R. Pr. I.3#, * | माहेन्द्र name of a very ancient, pre-
Pr.I.37, V.Pr.I.59, R.T.28 also cf
अर्धमात्रालाघवेन पुत्रोत्सवं मन्यन्ते वैयाकरणः
Par. Sek. Pari. 132. The instant is
taken to be egual to the throbb-
ing of the eye, or a flash of lightri-
ing, or a note of a wood-cock.
माधव the well-known epoch-making
scholar of the 14th century who
has written a number of treatises
in various Sastras. His धातुवृत्ति is
Paninian grammar ascribed to इन्द्
of which some references only are
available. The grammar work is
also referred to asपेन्द्र: cf. यान्युञ्जह्यार्
महेन्द्राद् व्यासो व्याकरणार्णवात् | पदरत्नानि ;
तानि सन्ति पाणिनिगेाष्पदे Devabodhara
com. on the Mahabharata. For
details see p. 124-27 Vol. VII
Mahabhsya, D. E. Societys
Editiom.
' a well-known work in grammar. माहेढासूत्र the fourteen sitras अइउण्,
माघवीया-धातुवृत्ति a learned gloss on
the धातुपाठ of Panini by माधव. See
माधव.
' माधुर्वृति a gloss not composed by,
but simply explained by am inha-
bitant of Mathura or Madhur.
Such a gloss is referred to in the
Mahabhagya on P.IV.3.101 Vart.3,
" which possibly might be referring
to an existing gloss on the Sitras of
ऋलक् etc. which are believed to
have been composed by Siva and
taught to Panini, by means of the
sounds of the drum beaten at the
end of the dance; cf. दृतावसाने नट-
राजराजेा ननाद ढक्कां नवपञ्चवारम् ' उद्धर्तुकामः
सनकादिसिद्धानेतद्विमरौ शिवसूत्रजालम् Nandi-
keswara-krika 1. For details see
Vol. VII Vyakarana Mahabhasya,
D. E. Society's edition.
Panini, which was being explain- | माहेश्वरसूत्र the Sutras,the authorship
ed at Mathura, at the time of
: Patafijali. The term मधुरा was used
, for मधुरा in ancient times and the
word माधुरी वृत्ति is also used for
. माधुरी वृति.
मान krt affix आन of the present parti-
of which is attributed to Siva; the
stºtras अइउण् etc. giving the alpha-
bet. See माहुदामूत्र.
मि ( मिप् ) pcrsonal ending of the
first person ( उत्तमपुरुष ) singular;
cf. तितरिझ> P.III.4.78.
ciple with the augment म् prefixed मित् (I) characterized by the mute
. to it by अन मुक् P.VII.2.82: e. g.
जूमान:, एघमान:, याचमान: etc.
मार्कण्डेय an old grammarian, who
wrote a grammar of Prakpta
languages which is known by the
name प्राकृतसर्वस्व.
मार्दव softness of the voice characteriz-
ing the pronunciation of a grave
vowel: cf मार्दवं स्वरस्य मृदुता स्निग्धता:
also cf. अन्ववसर्गो मार्दवमुरुता खस्येतिं
< नीचैःकरााणे इाब्दस्य M.Bh. on P.I.2.29,
30; cf. also, T. Pr. XXII.10,
माला a variety of the utterance of
' the Veda-Samhita ( वेदपाठ): a kind
' of Krama-Patha, one of the eight
* artificial recitations.
letter म्; augments So characterized
such as नुम् , अम् and the like, are
inserted after the last vowel of a
word to which they are to be
added; cf. मिदवेन्त्यात् परः P. I. 1.47;
(2) a technical term applied to the
fifty-five roots which are headed
by the root घट् and which belong
to the first corjugation, to the
roots ज्वळ etc., as also to the roots
जन्, जू, कट्, रञ्ज् and roots ending
in अम्. These roots are not really
characterized by the mute letter
म्, but they are given the
designation मित्. The use of the
designation मित् is (a) the shortening

मितवृत्यर्थेसेग्रहृ
of the penultimate vowel which :
has been lengthened by Vrddhi ,
before the causal sign iि, and (b) ;
the optional lengthening of the ;
penultimate vowel before the affix )
चिण् and णमुट्, For a complete list ]
of *mit roots see Dhtup:ha.
मितवृत्यर्थेसेग्रह name ofa grammatical -
work on the Stºtras of Paःini by
Udayama.
मिताक्षरा name of a commentary on
the Sarasvatasara, written by Hari-
deva.
मिन् tad. affix in the sense of posses-
sion added to the word गी; e.g.
गोमिन् , cf. ज्योत्स्राताभखना ...गोमिन्मलिन-
मलीमसा: P.V.2.114.
मिप् personal ending मि of the first
person ( उत्तमपुरुष ) sing. Parasmaix
pada: cf. तिप्तस्झि...महृिङ्क P. III.4.78.
मिश्र roots taking personal endings of
both the Padas; Ubhayapadin
roots this term मिश्र is given in
Bopadeva's grammar.
मिश्री a popular name given to the
commentary written by मैरवमिश्र
on the Paribhasendusekhara in
popular use by grammarians.
मीय tad. affix मीय along with म ( म)
applied to the word मध्य in the
sense of a case-affix ( locative
case-affix) e.g. मध्यमीय: cf मण्मीयौ च
प्रत्ययौ वक्तव्यौ Kas. on P. IV.3.60.
मुक् augment म् prefixed to the affix
अान (i.e. शानच् , चान् , and ढानन्)
of the pres. part. Atmanepada;
e. g. एधमान:, बर्धमानेः पवमानः, यजमानः,
etc.; cf. आने मुक् P. VII. 2. 82. See
सान.
aperture of the mouth; the main
place of the utterance of a letter.
मुखनासिकावचन definition of अनुनासक्र,
a letter which is pronounced
through both-the mouth and the |
285
मुख्यविशेष्य
letter which is uttered only thr-
ough the nose; e.g. ड्, ञ्ज , णु, न् , म्
and the nasalized vowels and
nasalized य् , वृ and ब्ट्; cf. मुखनासि-
क्रावचनेीSनुनासिकः Pan. I. 1.8: cf. also
अनुस्वारोतसा अनुनासिकाः (T. Pr. II.30),
where the fifth letters and the anu-
svara are called anumasika. Accor-
ding to Bhattoji, however, anu-
svara cannot be anumasika as it is
pronounced through the nose
alone, and not through both-the
mouth and the nose. As the anu-
svara is pronounced something
like a nasalized ग् according to the
Taittiriyas it is called a consonant
in the Taittiriya Pratisakhya: cf. '
अनुस्वारोप्युत्तमवद्यञ्जनमेव अस्मच्छाखायाम् !
अर्धगकररूपत्वात् / Com. on T. Pr. II.
30. _
मुखसुखार्थ a mute letter added to an
affix or a substitute cr the like,
which does not really form a
part of the affix etc., but which
simply facilitates the utterance
of it: cf. अथ मुखसुखार्थस्तकार: दकारोपि !
M. Bh. on I.1.1, WI.1.87; cf. also
अादति तकारो मुखसुखार्थः, न त्वयं तपरः
KS. on P. III.2.171.
मुख्य main, , principal, primary
substantive as contrasted with a
gualifying substantivg;cf.गौणमुख्ययो-
मुख्ये कार्यसंप्रत्यय: Par. Sek. Pari. 15.
the principal word in a
sentence which comes last in
the technical expression of the
import or इाब्दबोध. It is described
as primary and not Subordinated
to any other thing ( अन्याविशेषणीभूत).
This मुख्यविशेष्य is, in a way,the cru-
cial point in the various theories
of import; e.g. according to the
grammarians the verbal activity is
the principal word while,according
to.:the Mimarhsakas the bhva
nose-as contrasted with नासिक्य a ] ]
is the principal word.and accord-

मुग्धबोध
ing to the Naiyayikas it is the
subject that is the principal word.
मुग्धबोध lit. instructions to the igno-
rant: a treatise on grammar simi-
lar to the Astadhyayi of Panini but
much shorter, written by Bopa-
deva or Vopadeva an inhabitant
of the greater Maharastra in the
Vardh district, in the thirteenth
century. After the fall of the
Hindu rulers in Bengal, treatises
like भाषावृात and others written by
eastern grommarians fell into the
back-ground and their place was
taken up by easier treatises written
by Bopadeva and others Many
commentaries were written upon
the Mugdhabodha, of which the
Vidyanivsa is much known to
grammarians
K a commentary work on
Mugdhabodha;the nameis given to
commentaries written by Rama-'
tarkavga (called मुग्धबोधपरिशष्ट },
by Radhvallabha (called सुबोधिनी), .
by Gangadhara (called सतुसेग्रह ),
by Durgadasa, by Dayarama and
by Ramnanda.
the substitution of मु for the
syllable beginning with द् in certain
cases; cf. अदसोसेदादु दो मःP. VIII.2.
80.
मुद् a technical term for the sibilants
छे , ट् and √ given in the Vajasane-
yi-Pratisakhya: cf. मुच V. Pr. I.52,
cf also W. Pr. III.9, III.13,IV.
122.
मुनेित्रय the popular and honorific
, term for the three prominent
grammarians of the Paninian sys-
tem of grammar wiz. पााणेनि, कात्यायन
and पतञ्जलि who were the pioneers
of that system; cf. मुनित्रयं नमस्कृत्य
Siddhanta-Kaumud beginning.
the augment म् inserted imme-
286
मृदु
word for which it is prescribed: cf.
अरुर्द्विषदजन्तस्य मुम् P.VI.3.67; cf. also
P.III.2.26, V. 4.7 and VI.3.69-72.
मूर्धन् the top of the orifice of the
mouth; the place of utterance
( स्थान ) of the letters ऋ, ऋ, ट् , ट्, हु
ढ and णु, र् and ब्: cf. ऋटुरषाणां
मूर्वा S. K. on P. I. 1.9; cf also
ष्टौ मूर्धनिV.Pr.I.67,R.T.6,R.Pr.I.19,
and T.Pr. II.37 where र् appears
excluded.
मृधेन्य letters pronounced at the place
called मूर्धन्: cerebral or lingual
letters,the letters क्र, ऋ,ट्ट् ,ई ,इ, ण्|.
मूळ (1) the root of the teeth given as
the place of origin for the letter र्
in the Rk Tantra : cf. रेफस्तु दन्त्येो
दन्तमूले वा. R. T. 8; (2) the main
instrutment of the utterance of
letters known as मूलकरण or अनुप्रदान.
मूलप्रकृति the original base of the
word used in language;the root and
the pratipadika; the word परमप्रकृति ,
is also used in the same sense.
मृत् the crude base of a declinable
word; the pratipadika; the term is
found used in the Jainendra Vya-
karana; cf Jain. Vyk. I..1.5.
मृदु (1) soft in utterance ; the term is
used in the Vjasaneyi Pratisakhya
for the क्षेत्र, प्रश्लिष्ट, तैरोव्यञ्जन, and
पादवृत्त varieties of the circumflex
accent (स्वरित) out ofwhich theपादवृत्त
is the softest ( मृदुतम ) and conse-
guently always called मृदु, while the
others are called मृदु only with
respect to the preceding one in
the order given above; viz.अभिनिहृत,
क्षेप्र etc.cf.सर्वतक्ष्णोभिनिहृत:प्राश्ठष्टस्तदनन्तरम्
तते मृदुतरौ स्वरा जात्यक्षप्राबुभौ स्मृतौ |
ततेी मृदुतंर: स्वारस्तैरोव्यञ्जन उच्यते | पांदवृतेो
मृदुतमस्त्वेतत्स्वारबलाबलम्Uvvata onV.Pr.
I. !25; (2) soft, as opposed to hard;
the term is used in connection with
the first,third and fifth consonants
: diately after the final vowel of the
of the five classcs.

_ ठीने
-x
287 यं
_
र्मक्डोनल् [MACDONELL,ARTHUR
ANTHONY ] a deep scholar of
Vedic Gram. and Literature who
has written an exhaustive Wedic
Grammar; in treatment, at places
he differs from Panini and follows
a different method,but the manner
of thinking and argument is on
original lines.
मेघविजय a Jain grammarian of
the seventeenth century who has
written a grammar work, similar
to the Siddhanta Kaumudi, on the
Sabdanussana of Hemacandra.
The grammar work is called
_* _
ईमकौमुदी, or चन्द्रप्रभा also.
मैत्रायणीय प्रातिशाख्य a Pratiskhya or :
Parsada work giving the peculiari- !
ties of Sandhi, accent and the ]
like, in changing the Maitrayantya-
Sarhhitapagha into the Padapatha.
मेत्रेयरक्षित a recognised scholar of
Paninis grammar who belonged
to the Eastern part of India and
fourished in the beginning of the
twelfth century. As it appears
from the name Maitreya Raksita
he appears to.have been a Buddhist
grammarian. Subsequent writers
in their works refer to him by the
name Raksita alone, as also by the
name Maitreya, but very rarely
by the name Maitreya Raksita.
He wrote many works on gram-
mar of which the *tantrapradipa'
a learned commentary on Jine-
ndrabuddhi's Nysa on Kasika was
a reputed one, which, although
available in a fragmentary manu-
script form today, has been
profusely quoted by prominent
grammarians after him.
मोक्षेश्वर a grammarian of the four-
teenth century who has written a
commentary on the Katantra Vrtti
of Durgasifinha. He has written
a commentary on the Akhyatavrtti
of the Katantra school as also a
short treatise dealing with the krt
affixes called Krdvrtti.
म्लेच्छ (I) a word although correct,
yet looked upon as incorrect owing
to its faulty utterance; (2) a
person like the uncultured people,
who is not able to pronounce
words correctly cf. म्लेच्छा मा भ्रमत्ययेयं
व्याकरणम् M. Bh. I. 1, Ahnika 1.
य
य् (l) a consonant of the palatal
class, called semivowel or अन्तःस्थ
( spelt as अन्तस्थ also ), possessed of
the properties संवृतत्व, नाद, घोष and
अनुनासिकत्व in addition; (2) a substi-
tute for म् when that म् is followed
by द् which is followed by य्. e. g.
किंय्ह्य: cf. यवलपरे यवला वा. P. VIII.
3. 26 Vart.l ; (3) य् looked upon as
possessed of a very little effort in
production i. e. which appears as
almost dropped but not comple-
tely dropped when its elision is
prescribed at the end of a word.
e. g- भीय् अच्युत; cf. ब्येलेधुप्रयत्नतर:
इाक्रटयनस्य P. VIII. 3.18.
य (1) the consonant य् with अ added
to it merely for the sake of facility
in pronunciation; यकार is also
used in the same sense: e. g. लिटि
वये यः: P.VI.1.38 cf. T.Pr.I: 17,21;
(2) kpt affix (यत्) prescribed as कृत्य
or potential passive participle; e.g.
चयम्, गयम्, दाप्यम् , शक्यम् , गद्यम् , अजर्यम्
पण्यम् etc.: cf. अवे यत्...अजर्य संगतम् P.
III. 1.97-105; (3) krt. affix
which is also an affix called krtya;
e. g- ्ोद्यम् , भाव्यम, घात्यम् , स्तुत्यम् ,
कल्प्यम् , खेयम् , भ्रत्य:, भिद्यः, पुष्य:,
also कार्यम् ; cf. P. III. 1.106-128:
{4) krt affix ण्यत् ( which is also
कृत्य ), e. g कार्यम् , हार्यम् , वाक्यम् ,
लब्यम् , कुण्डपाय्यम्. etc.: cf P. III.

288
यजादि
1.124-132: (5) tad. afix य afixed
(a) in the sense of collection to
पेोई, बात etc., as also to खळ, गे ad
रथ, e. g. पाद्या, रथ्या etc. 9ः P. HV.
2. 49, 50ः (b) in the वातुरांथक senses
to बल, कुल, तुल etc. e. g. वल्यः,.डुब्धुम्
ef. P V.2, 80, (c) as a Saisika
tad. afix to ग्राम' along with the
, affix खञ्ज e. g. ग्राम्यः, ग्रामीणः: cf P:
[V. 2.94 (d) in the sense of good
therein * ( तत्र साधुः ) and other
tated senses affixed to रुम, संदिर
पूर्व, and सीम: e. g. सभ्य:, पूयं; .9tg.
G. P. IV. 4.105, 109, 133, 137,
* 138: (e) in the sense of * deserving
it ' to दण्ड and other words, e. g.
दण्ड्य, अध्र्य, मध्य, मध्य, etc.: cf P. V.
1.66: ( f ) in the sense of quality
, or action to सखि e. g. सख्यम् ; cf P.
V. }.126: (6) tad. affix यत् applied
to (a) राजन् श्वशुर, कुल, मनु in the
sense of offspring, (b) किल्, उखा, वाड,
ऋतु and others, under certain
conditions; cf. P. IV. 2.17, 31,
32, 101, (c) to अर्ध, परार्ध, words in
the class headed by दि्, छन्दस् and
others in specific senses; cf P. IV.
3-46, 54 etc. and (d) in specific
senses to specific words mentioned
here and there in a number of
stºtras from IV.4, 75 to V.4.25; (e)
to ढााखा, मुख, जघन and others in the
sense of इव (similar to) e.g. दाख्यः,
मुख्य:, etc.: cf. P. V. 3. 103; (7)
case-ending य substituted for ड of
the dative sing; e. g. रामाय ef.
P. VII. 3.102: (8) verb-affix यक्
applied to the nouns कण्ड् and
" others to make them ( denomina-
tive ) roots; e. g. कण्ड्य,मन्द्य etc. cf.
कण्ड्वादिभ्यो यक् P. III. 1.27 (9) |
Vikarana य ( यक् ) applied to any
root before the Sarvadhatuka per-
sonal endings to form the base
for the passive voice as also the
base for the * Karmakartari voice
e gः क्रियते, भ्यते, cf. सार्वधातुके यक् P. |
यङ्गळगन्त a secondary root formed by
III. 1.67 (10) Utadi affix य ( यक् )
applied to the root हृन् to form the
Vedic word अघ्न्य: cf अघ्न्यादयश्च:
( 1 ) augment य ( यक् ) added to
the affix क्त्वा in Vedic Literature:
e. g. दत्वाय: cf. क्त्ची यक् P. VII.1.47;
(12) verb affix यङ्क added to a root
to form its Intensive base ( which
sometimes is dropped ) and the
root is doubled. e. g. चेक्रीयते,वर्करीति;.
cf. P. III. 1.22,24; (13) short term
( प्रत्याहृार ) supposed to be beginn-
ing with य in the affix यइ in the
stºtra धातेरेकाची ... यङ्क III. 1.22, and
ending with ङ्क in the sutra लिड्या-
दिष्यङ्क III. 1.86, with a view to in-
clude the various verb affixes and
conjugational signs.
यक् the affix य: see य (8), (9), (10)
and (l l) above.
यक्षवर्मन author of the commentary
called चिन्तामणि on the Sabdnu-
Ssana ofSakatyama.
यङ्क see य (l2) and (13) above.
यडन्त a secondary root formed by
adding the affix यङ्क in the sense of
repetition and intensity, to roots
having one syllable and beginn-
ing with a consonant: cf. धातोरेकाचें
हृलद: क्रियासमभिहारे यङ्क P. III. 1.22,
23,24. See य (12) above.
adding the affix यङ्क to roots speci-
fied in P. III. 1.22,23,24, which
affix is sometimes dropped: cf.
यज्ञेचि व: P. II. 4. 74. The yahlu-
ganta roots take the parasmaipada
personal endings and not the
atmanepada ones which are appli-
ed to yafianta roots.
हुगान्तशिरोमाणे a grammar work
Healing with the frequentative
roots written by PanditaSesakrsha.
यज्ञादि roots headed by the root यज्
which take the sarhprasrana sub-
stitute for their semivowel before

यज्ञम
<
289
यथालक्षणे
terminations marked with the
mute letter क्: c.g. इज्यते, इटिः cf.
वविखपियज्ञादीनां क्रिति P.VI.1.15. These
roots are nine in number, यज् , वप् ,
वंद् , वस् and others which are of
the first conjugation given by
Paini in his Dhatupatha at the end
of the roots of the first conjugation.
यञ् (l) short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) formed
by the letter य of हृयवरट् and the
mute letter ञ्ज of इभञ् including
serni-vowels and the third and the
' fourth consonants excepting च् , दु
and ध् of the five consonant
groups: cf. अती दीधे यान P. VII. 3.
10l ; (2) tad. affix added (a) in
the sense of गेत्र (grand-children
and their descendants) to words of
the गर्ग class and some other words
under specific conditions, e.g. गाग्र्य:
बात्स्य:, काप्यः etc., cf. गर्गादिभ्यो यञ् and
the following P.IV. 1. 105-108: (b)
in the sense of collection to केदार,
गाणका, केढ and अश्व, cf. P.IV.2.40
and the Warttika.thereon and IV.
2.48; (c) in the Saiska senses to
the word द्वप, cf. P.IV.3.10: (d)
to the word कंसीय e. g. कांस्यम् cf.
P.IV.3.168, and (e) to the words
अभिजित्, विदभृत् and others when
they have the tad. affix अण् added
to them : e.g. अाभजत्य: cf. P. V. 3.
118.
यण् a brief term for letters य् , व् , र्
and ， i.e. the semi-vowels;cf. इक्रीं
यणाद P. VI. I. 77; cf. also I. 1.45
and VI. 4. 81.
यण्वत् containing a semi-vowel inside
it: cf. संयोगादरातो धातोर्यण्वतः P. VIII.
2.43.
यत् see य (6).
यत्न ( 1) effort in the utterance of a
letter: the word which is general-
ly used for such an effort is प्रयत्न.
This effort is described to be oftwo
kinds अाभ्यन्तर internal i.e. below the
37
root of the tongue and बाह्य above
the root of the tongue i.e. inside
the mouth; cf. यत्नं द्विधा | अाभ्यन्तरो
बाह्यश्च | S. K. on P. I. 1.9; (2) spe-
cific effort, by adding a word to a
rule for drawing some inference,
with a view to removing some
technical difficulty: cf तन पये धावती-
त्यादौ यत्नान्तरमास्थेयम् Ks. on P. VIII.
2. 25. The phrase कर्तव्योत्र यत्न:
often occurs in the Mahabhasya.
यत्प्रकरण lit. the topic or the section
of यत्; the section where the tad.
affix यत् is prescribed. This tad. affix
यत् is prescribed in the fifth adhyaya
of Panini in a number of rules in
different and different senses ; cf.
यत्प्रक्ररणे रथाच P.V. 1.6 Vart.1 ; यत्प्रकरणे
व्रह्मवर्चसान्त्व P.V.1.39 Vart. 1.
यथाग्र्हीर्त as they are actually found
in Vedic recital with some irregu-
larties of euphonic changes,length-
ening of the vowel and the like.
Specimens of such phrases are
given in R.Pr.II.33 to 39.
यथान्यासे as it is actually put in the
rule or a treatise by the author.
The phrase is often used in the
Mahabhsya when after a long dis-
cussion, involving further and fur-
ther difficulties, the author reverts
to the original stand and defends
the writing of the sutra as it stands.
सिध्यत्येवमपाणिनीये तु भवति or सूत्रं भिद्यत !
तर्हि यथान्यासमवास्तु is the usual exp-
ression found in the Mahabhasya;
cf, M.Bh. I.1. Ahnika 1, I.1.1, 9,
20, 62, 65 etc.
यथालक्षणं as formed according to
rules. The phrase यथालक्षणमप्रयुक्त is
very often found in the Maha-
bhasya as a general guiding re-
mark that noun-forms or word-
forms which are not found in use
in the language of the people or
in literature should be understood

यय्
as they are derived by observing
all the rules that are applicable.
यथावत् as it is in the original Safahi-
tp:ha without any change of
cf.. निपातैर्यद्यदिहृन्तकुवलेचैचण्कृचिद्यत्रयुक्तम्
P. WIII. 1.30; cf also the usual
expression यद्योगादानघात: found in
commentary works.
accent, etc. when cited in the | यद्वत lif. a word formed from यत्: a
Padapha: the word अव्ययवत् (not
allowing any change or reduction)
is given by Uvvata in explanation
ofयथावत्: cf. दृढयते पदं यथावत् R. Pr.
XI.31.
यथाश्रुतार्थग्राहिन् one who grasps the
sense as given by the actual word-
ing withoutgoing into details re: the
word which contains the pronºun
यत् in it which prevents sarvanu-
datta for a verb which follows;
cf. यदस्मिन्वर्तते यदृतम् M.. Bh. on P.
VIII.1.66; cfals6. यदृतेोपपदाच w.
Pr. VI. 14, where Uvvata explains
यद्वतasयद् वृत्तं वृत्तं सर्वद्विभक्त्यन्तं सर्वप्रत्यया-
न्तं च गृह्यन्ते [ V.'Pr. VI. 14 com.
use or application etc.: cf यथाश्रुतग्रा- | यम् a short term (प्रत्याहृार) for the con-
हृिप्रतिपत्त्रपक्षेयं यथोद्देशपक्षः इति कैयट: Par.
Sek. Pari. 2,
यथासेख्ये in respective order, the first
for the first, the second for the
second, and so on; when the
sonants which begin with य् ( in
हृयवरट् )and end (in ञ्जमडणनम् ) before
the mute म् i.e. all semivowels, and
fifth consonants of the five classes;
cf. हृले यमां यमि लेीप: Pan. VIII.4.64.
pumber of subjects and predicates | यम (1) one of a pair, a twin letter
is the same, they should be conne-
cted in the respective order: cf.
• यथासंख्यमनुदेशः समानाम् P.I.3.10.
_X
यथोदेशा ( परिभाषा) a short phrase or
term for the Paribhs or guiding
statement यथोद्देशं संज्ञापरिभाषम् ः * tech-
nical terms and Paribhas are
to be interpreted at the place
where they are stated, and not at
the place or places of their appli-
cation or utility.'
यदागम ( परिभाषा ) short familiar word-
ing for the dictum or Paribhagº
यदागमास्तद्गुणीभूतास्तद्ग्रहणेन गृह्यनेत ' Par.
_
Sek. Pari. 11.
यदृच्छाशब्द् lit. a chance-word: Sara-
jfa-sabda or proper noun which is
available in pronunciation be-
fore a nasal letter and similar
to it, when the nasal consonant
is preceded by any one of the
four consonar.ts of the five classes;
a transitional sound intervening
between a non-nasal and the
following nasal as a counterpart
of the n6n-nasal: cf. वर्गष्वाद्यानां चेतुर्णां
पञ्चम पर मथ यमे नाम पूर्वसदृशे वर्णः
प्रात्राख्ये प्रसिद्धः S.K. on P.WIII. l.1;
(2) name given to the seven
musical notes, found in the
singing of Saman; cf. मन्द्रमध्यमत्रा-
ख्येषु त्रिषु वाचः स्थानेषु प्रत्येकं सत स्थरभद्र
भवन्ति कुदृप्रथमद्वितीयतृतीयचतुर्थमन्द्रातित्वार्यः
यमाः ' T. Pr. XXIII. 13,14.
given accidentally without any | यमन्वा anobscure term found used
attention to derivation or autho-
rity cf. अये , तर्हि यदृच्छाशब्देsपरिहार्यः |
छडि: लगिँडुः M. Bh.on Siva Stra2.
यद्योग a connection with the word
(pronoun) यत् by its use in the
same sentence and context, which
in the Phi:-stras राजाशेषस्य यमन्वावत्
( आद्युदात्ते भेवति ) Phi-sitra II. 42,
where the word यमन्वा is explained
as वृद्ध by the commentator for
the meaning of वृद्ध, see वृद्धिर्यस्याचा-
मादिस्तद् वृद्धम् P. 1.1.73.
prevents the anudatta ( grave ) यय् short term ( प्रत्याहृर ) for the con=
accent for the verb in thesentence:
ईonants beginning with य् ( in

_<
291
याजकादि
ट्यवरट् ) and ending before the ;
e. all !
mute letter य् ( in कपय् ) i.
consonants except 1्, य्, स्, and द्;
cf. अनुस्वारस्य ययि परसवर्णः P.VIII 4.
58 by which an at:usvara is
changed into a cognate letter of
the following which is a letter
included in यय्.
यर् a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for any
consonant except दृ ,
standing at the end of a word is
optionally changed to the nasal
consonant of its class if followed
by a nasal letter; cf. यरोनुनासिकेनु-
नासिकेा वा P. VIII.4.45: and (2) is
doubled if preceded by र् or ट् as
also if preceded by a vowel but
not followed by a vowel; e.g.
अर्कः, दद्धयत्र: cf. अन्वेी रहृाभ्यां द्व: अनाव
व P. VIII.4.46,47.
यल्ट् tad. affix य in the sense of posse-
ssion found in Vedic Literature
added optionally with the affix ख
(ईन)to the wordsवशेीभग and यशेौभग;
e.g	वेशेभग्यः_वैशेाभगीनः यशेीभग्य:,
योभगान:: cf. P.IV.4.131.
यलीप dropping of the consonant य्
which prevents the validity ofa
changed letter ( स्थानिवद्भाव ); cf. न
पदान्तद्विर्वचनवरेयलोप......विधिषु P.I.1.58.
यवमध्यt lit having the centre bulging
out like the Yava grain; name
given to a variety of the Gayatri
which has 7 letters in the first and
third (last) feet and 10 letters in
the second i.e. the middle foot;
the name is also given to a Maha-
brhat having the first
last feet consisting of 8 letters and
the middle one consisting of 12
syllables: cf R.Pr.XVI.18 and 48.
यवर्ग the class of the consonants
headed by य् i.e. the seml-vowels
य, व्, र and ळ.
=.*
_
यवादि a class of words headed by
the word यव, the taddhita affix मत्
which, (l) !
after which does not get the con-
sonant मृ changed into ऋ although
the affix मत् be added to a word
ending in म or अ, or having म or
अ as the penultimate letter: e. g.
यवमान् , ऊर्मिमान् , भूमिमान् etc.: cf.
Kas. on P.VIII.2.9. This यवादिगण
is looked upon as आकृतिगण-
यद्मा:कवि a grammarian, the author
of a treatise named Bhºsanussana.
यदा:सागर a Jain grammarian, the
author of a work named Samasa-
sobha.
यज्ञोवर्मदेव the same as वक्षत्रर्मन् the
author of * चिन्तृामणि ' a commen-
tary on the Sabdnussana of
Sakatyana.
यस् tad. affix य with mute सु to indi-
cate the application of the term
पद् to the preceding base as a con-
sequence of which the final म् of
the words क्रम् and ढाम्, after which
यस् is prescribed, gets changed
into anusvara e. g. केयु:, दंयु:: cf
P.W.2.138.
यस्कादि words headed by the word
यत्क्र, the affixes in the sense of *a
descendant' placed after which
are elided and the words are to
be used in the plural number in
the masculine gender; e. g. यरुका:;
cf Kas. on P. II.4.63.
या substitute for a case affix in Vedic
Literature; e.g. उरुया, धृष्णुया for
उरुणा, धृष्णुना, cf. सुपां सुलुक्o P.VII.
1.39.
| याच् substitute for a case affix found
and the |
in Wedic Literature; e. g. साधुय for
साधु: cf. सुपां सुलुक् .. ... याञ्जाल: P. VII.
1. 39.
याजकादेि a class of words headed by
the words याजक्र, पूजक, परिचारक and
others with which a word in the
genitive case is compounded,in spite
of the prohibition of compounds
with such words, laid down by the

याद्
292
युक्तवद्भाव
rule क्र्तरि च P. II. 2.16; e.g. ब्राह्मण-
याजक्रः. ब्राह्मणपूजक: etc.: cf KS. on P.
II.2.9. These words, याजक and
others standing as the second
members of compounds have their
last vowel accented acute;cf.P.VI .
2.151.
याद् augment या prefixed to the case-
affixes marked with the mute letter
ङ्क (i,e. the dat, sing. the abl. sing
the gen. sing. and the loc sing.)
after a feminine base ending in अ;
e. g. रमायै, रमाया:, रमायाम्: cf याडापः
P.VII.3.113.
यावदि a class of words headed by
the word याव to which the taddhita
affix क ( क्रन् ) is added without
any specific sense assigned to it;
e.g. याबक्र: मणिक: etc.; cf. Kas. on
P. V.4.29.
यासुद् augment यास् prefixed to the
parasmaipada case-endings of लिङ्क
(the potential and the benedictive)
which is accented acute; e.g. कुर्यात्,
क्रियात्.
यास्क a reputed ancient Nirukta-
kara or etymologist, of the 6th
century B.C. or even a few cen-
turies before that, whose work, the
Nirukta, is looked upon as the
oldest authoritative treatise regard-
ing derivation of Vedic words.
Yaska was preceded by a number
of etymologists whom he has men-
tioned in his work and whose works
he has utilised. Yaska's Nirukta
threw into the back-ground the
older treatises on etymology, all of
, which disappeared gradually in
the course of time.
यद् augment य् prefixed to the tad.
affix इष्ठ when it is applied to the
word बहु,in which case बहु is chang-
ed intoभू: e.g. भूयिष्ठ: cf बहेोलेपो भू च
बर्हः; इष्ठस्य यिट् व; P. VI. 4.168,159.
यु general wording including the
affixes युच्, युट्, टधुत्, ट्युट् and ण्युट् of
which only यु remains as the affix,
which is changed into अन by the
rule युवोरनाक्रौ P.VII.1.1.
युक् augment य् (1) added to a verb-
base or a root ending in अा before
the affix चिण् and krt affixes marked
with mute ञ् or णु: e.g. अदयि, दायक:
cf. आतो युक् चिण्कृतोः, P.VII.3.33; (2)
added to the roots शा, ( इ ),
छा ( छी ), सो ( सा ), हृा ( हु ), ब्यां ( य )
वा ( वै ) and पा ( पा and पे ) before
the causal affix णिच् ; e. g. निशाय्यति
पाययति etc. cf इाच्छासाह्वाव्यावेपां युक्
P. VII.3.37; (3) added in Vedic
Literature to the frequentative
base of the root मृज् of which मर्मज्य
is the form of perf Ist and 3rd
pers. sing. instead of ममार्ज: cf.
दाधर्ति...ममृज्यागनीगन्तीति च P.VII.4.65.
युक्त (l) proper, appropriate, justi-
fied; the word is very frequently
used in the Mahabhasya and other
grammar works; (2) the sense of
the original base which is connect-
ed with the sense of the affix; cf.
अथवा युक्तः प्रकृत्यर्थः प्रत्ययार्थेन संबद्धः,
Ks. on P. I. 2.51 ; (3) connected
with; cf. उकारश्रतिकरोणेन युक्त: R. Pr.
I. 29; तथायुक्तं चानीप्सितम् P. I. 4.50.
युक्तवत् the sense of the original
base,the affix after which is dropp-
ed by means of the term डप् as
contrasted with the terms लेोप and
लुक् which are used in the same
sense: cf. लुतवदिति निष्ठाप्रत्ययेन क्तवतुना
प्रकृत्यर्थ उच्यते स हि प्रत्ययार्थमात्मना युनक्ति '
KS. on P. I. 3.51.
lit. behaviour like the
original base. The term is used
in the sense of possession of, or
getting, the same gender and
number as was possessed by the
base to which the tad. affix was
added and subsequently dropped
by a rule of Panini in which the
word डुप् is put in the sense of

युक्तारोह्यादि 293
युच्
dropping: e. g. कुरयः दश: or अज्ञ:
देश: in the sense of कुरूणां or अङ्गन्
निवासो जनपदः cf. जनपदलुप् P. IV.3.31
and ढपि युक्तवद् यातवचन P.H.2.31cf
also M.Bh. on P. I. 2.51 and 52.
युक्तारोह्यादि a class of compound
words headed by the word युक्तारोई
which have their initial vowel
accented acute in spite of the ge-
neral dictum that a compound
has the capacity of conveying the
sense of both पट and घट. Possibly
this theory is advocated by grarn-
marians, cn the analogy of words
like पितरौ or मातरौ for मातंपितरी, द्यावा
for द्यावापृथिवी and so on; cf. सिद्धं तु
युगपदधिकरणवचने द्वन्द्ववचनात् P. II 2.29
Vart. 2. For details see Vyakara-
ramahabhasya on चार्थे द्वन्द्वः P. II.
2.29.
word except a Bahuvrihi com- युगपदधिकरणविवक्षा desite to express
pound word, has its last vowel
accented acute: cf. Kas. Om P. V I.
2.81. _
← the sense possessed by the
two or tnore senses simultaneously
(by one word) ; cf. सर्वाणि द्वन्द्व बहुर्थीनि
युगपदधिकरणविवक्षायां द्वन्द्वो भवति M. Bh.
on P. II.4.62. See युगपदधिकरणवचनता.
original word towhich the affix, | युगपद्वचनता expression of the senses
subsequently dropped by means
of the word लुप, was added.
'_
युक्ति (1) argumentation: reasoning;
(2) current maxim: cf. युक्तिसिद्धमतत्,
of two words together by one
word cf. बिग्रहे खल्वपि युगपद्वचनता दृश्यते !
द्यावा ह क्षामा | द्यावा चिदस्मै पृथिवी नमेत !
M. Bh. on P. II. 2.29 Wart 6.
युगपत्प्रसङ्ग simultaneous possibility of ] युग्म (I) lit, pair; the word is used for
the application of two rules or
operations, when in grammar no
option re : their application is
admissible as it is admissible
according to Mimarhsa rules re :
two operations enjoined by Vedic
behests. In Grammar, only one of
such rules applies, the priority of
application being based upon the
criteria of परत्व, नित्यत्व, अन्तरङ्गत्व and
अपवादत्व: cf. शब्दपरविप्रतिषेधो नाम भवति
यत्रोभयेयुगप्रसङ्ग: | M.Bh. on WI.
1.158 Wart, 12.
युगपदधिकरणवचनता denotation of
two or more things by one single
the second and fourth consonants
ख्, व्र, छ, इट् etc. of the five classes
which, in a way are combinations
of two consonants; cf. युग्माः सोष्माण:
R. T. 16; cf also युग्मौ सेीष्माणौ where
the word स्रष्मन् is explained as उष्म
बायुसेतन सह्य वर्तन्त इति सोष्मेण: | खघ छइ उढ
थध फभ: cf.also युग्मयींद्वितीयचतुर्थयोः: (2)
even, as opposed to odd, referring
to the vowels ओ and औौ which are
even in the enumeration ए ओी ए अौ.
The consonants called युग्म viz. ख,
घ and others which are defined as
युग्म are also the even consonants in
their classes,
member by virtue of their being |युच्， krt affix यु changed into अन, (1)
put together in a dvandva com-
pound of two or more words; the
grammarians advocate this doc-
trine stating that in a dvandva
compound such as घटपटौ or घटपटम् ,
the word घट has the capacity of
expressing the sense ofboth घट and
पट, which in a sentence घटः पटश्च, it
does not possess. Similarly पट also |
applied in the sense of "a habituat-
ed agent to infransitive roots in
the sense of movement or utter-
ance, to Atmanepadi roots beginn-
ing with a consonant, to the roots
ड, चेक्रम् स्ट, द्युच्, कुथ्, as also to roots
in the sense of decoration: e.g.
वलन:, शब्दन:: cf P.III. 2. 148-15I:
(2) applied to causal roots, as also

युद्
to the r00ts अस् श्रन्थ् and 0thers in
the sense of verbal activity when
the word so formed has always the
feminine gender; e.g. कारणा, हृरणा,
आसना, घट्ना,वेदना etc.; cf. P.III.3.107
and the Varttikas thereon; (3) ap-
plied to roots ending in अा and pre-
ceded by the indeclinables ईषद्, दुस्
or सु in the sense of easy or difficult
for obtainment and,wherever seen
to any root in the Vedic language,
as also to some other roots as
found in actual use in the classi-
cal literature; e. g. ईषद्वानी गौर्मवता,
दु्नः, सुपान: etc. सूपसदन:, दुर्योघनः,
दुर्मर्षण: etc., cf. P.III.8.128-130.
युद augment य् prefixed to the tad.
affix फिञ् ( अायनेि ) after the words
दगु, कोसल, कर्मार, छाग and वृष: e.g.
दागल्यायनिः, क्रौसल्यायनि:, कार्मार्यायणिः,
वाष्र्यायाण:: cf. P. IV. 1.155 Vrt. 1.
युवन् lit young person; masculine;
the word is given as a technical
term in grammar in the sense of
one, who is the son of the grand-
son or his desceadant, provided
his father is alive; the term is also
applied to a nephew, brother, or
a paternal relative of the grand-
son or his descendant, provided
his elderly relative, if not his
his father, is alive; it is also appli-
ed to the grandson, in case respect
is to be shown to him: cf. P. IV.
1.163-167. The affixes prescribed
in the sense ofबुवन् are always
applied to a word ending with a
tad. affix applied to it in the sense
of an offspring (अपत्य) or grandson
(गोत्र), in spite of the ruling that in
the sense of grandson or his
descendant (गोत्र), one affix only इञ्
or अण् or the like is added to the
base; e.g. गाग्र्यस्यापत्यं गाग्र्यायण:, दाक्षरपत्ये
दाक्षाय्ण: गाग्र्यं जीवति तस्य भ्राता सुपेण्डे बां
गाम्यायैर्ण: तत्रभवान् गाग्र्यः; गाग्र्यायो बा.
294
योग
युवपद a conventional term used )
the first pada of the seventh adh-
yya which begins with the sutra
युवोरनाकौ P.VII.i.1.
युचपत्यय tad. afix फक् ( अायन ), क्ष्ज्ञि
( अायनि ) or any other in thesens
of युवन् which is to be applied to a
base ending with an affix in the
sense of ofispring ( अपत्यप्रत्ययान्त ) or
with an affix in the sense of a
grandson ( गोत्रप्रत्ययान्त ). The affix
is not applied when a female of
Spring is meant.
युवसंज्ञ the technical term युवन् which
is given to persons described or
mentioned in P.IV.1.163 to 167.
युवादि a class of words headed by the
word युवन् which have the taddhita
affix अ ( अण् ) added to them in
jhe sense of fduty or *nature': e.g.
यैौवनम् स्थाविरम्, इत्रम् etc.; cf. K. on
P.V.1.130.
युष्मत्पाद् conventional name given to
the third pada of the fourth
adhyāya of Paint's Asidhyāy
which begins with the sutra
युष्मदस्मदोरन्यतरस्यां खञ् च P. IV. 3.1.
युध्मंद् designation of the second
person, used in the Jainendra
Vyakarana.
युस् tad. affix यु in the sense of possg-
ssion applied to (l) the word ऊर्णा;
e.g. ऊर्णायुः; cf. P. V. 2.128: (2) to
the words कं, दं, अहं and √र्भ: e-8
कंयुः, युः, अहंयुः, शुभद्युः, cf P.V.4.139*
140.
येननाप्राप्तम्याय a term used by gramma-
rians and commentators very fre*
guently for the maxim *यन नाङैते येी
वेधिरारभ्येत स तस्य बाधकं भवति " Par.
Sek. on Pari. 57. The term अपवाद-
|्याय is used in the Mahabhasya
which is the same as यननाप्रतिन्याय
of later grammarians.
योग , (1) a rule of grammar; the
word योग in this sense is very fre-

योगरूढ
295
यौगपद्य
quently found used in the Mah-
bhasya; cf the frcquent statements
अयं येगः शायीsकर्तुम् M. Bh. on P.I.1.
6, 62, etc. or क्रान्यस्य योगस्य प्रयोजनानि
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.31 Wart. 6,
I.1. 57 etc.; (2) grammatical
connection; cf द्रास्त्रकृते योगश्च Nir.
H.2: cf also षष्ठी स्थानेयेागा P.I.1.49.
यीगरूढ a word that can be derived,
but is always used in a specific
sense, the derivative sense which
is wider being limited: e.g. पङ्कजम्.
योगवाह a technical term used for
phonetic elements or letters which
are mentioned in the alphabet of
Panini, vi2., the Mahesvara stras
in contrast with the term अयेगवाह्य
which is used by grammarians for
the phonetic elements अनुस्वार, विसर्ग
and others which are not men-
tioned. ,See अयेागबाहृ: cf. also M.
Bh on Siva stitra 5.
योगविभाग division of a rule which has
been traditionally given as one sin-
gle rule, into two for explaining the
formation of certain words, which
otherwise are likely to be stamped
as ungrammatical formations. The
writer of the Warttikas and the
author of the Mahabhsya have
very frequently taken recourse to
this method of योगविभाग; cf. P.I.1.3
Wart. 8, I.1.17 Vart.1,I.1.61, Vव्रrt.
3; I. 4.59 Wart. 1, II. 4. 2. Vart.2,
III.1.67 Wart. 5, III.4.2. Wart. 6,
VI.I. I Wart. 5, VI.1.33 Vart.1 etc.
Although this Yogavibhaga is not
a happy method of removing diffi-
culties and has to be followed as a
last recourse, the Warttikakara has
suggested it very often, and some-
times a stra which is divided by
the Warttikakara into two,has been
recognised as a couple ofsitras in
the Sutrapatha which has come
down to us at present.
योगाङ्ग a partor portion of the rule
of the grammarian: cf. सति च योगाङ्ग
योगविभागः करिष्यत M.Bh. on P.I.1.30,
II.1.4 etc.
योगापेक्ष concerning only that parti-
cular rule to which it refers. The
word is many times used in conn-
ection with a deduction ( ज्ञापक )
which is not to be applied in gene-
ral, but which is restricted to the
functions of that rule from which
the deduction is drawn; cf. येोगपक्षे
ज्ञापकम् M.Bh. on P. I.1.23 Wart.10,
P.III.1.95 Vart.2.,P.IV. 1.87 Vart.
2, cf. also M. Bh. on P.I.3.62 and
V.1.1.
योगारम्भ laying down or citing a rule
as done by the writers ofsutras;cf.
नैकं प्रयोजनं योगारम्भं प्रयेीजयति M. Bh. on
P. III.1.67 Vrt. 5; P. VII. 1.96
Vart. 2.
थांग्यता compatibility of sense; cf.
असत्यपि च गेह्यनने तस्य योग्यतया गेान
इत्यभिधीयते Kas. on P. III.4.73.
योजक causal instrument or causal
agent; the word is used in the
sense of प्रयेोजक in the Jainendra
grammar; cf..]ain.I.2.125.
योनि place of origin: cf. तप: श्रुतं च
योनिश्च एतद् ब्राह्मणकारणम्, M. Bh. on P.
V.1.115: cf. also M.Bh. on P.IV.1.
48 Vart. 9; cf. also ओष्ठयेनिरोष्ठय:.
योषा a woman; the word is used in
the sense offeminine as applicable
to gender.
यौगपद्य simultaneity of occurrence;
simultaneous possibility of the
application of two rules which
evidently cannot apply simulta-
neously, but scope has to be given
to one of the two, the priority
being decided on the criteria of
परत्व, नित्यत्व, अन्तरङ्गत्व and अपवादत्व;cf.
न चास्ति यौगपद्यन संभव: M. Bh. on P.

यौगिक
296
रक्
I.1.57; cf also M.Bh. on I. 4.! , I.
4.2, II. 1.3 etc.
*& << _ -
यींगेश्क based on derivation; etymo-
logical; one of the kinds of words
रूढ, यौगिक, येोगरूढ and यौगिकरूढ; cf.
सैन्धवादं लवणे उभयलिङ्ग:	यौगिकस्या-
र्भिधयवळिङ्गम् l Kas. on P.II.4.31.
यौधेयादि a class of nine words headed
V
by the word यैोधेय, a taddhita affix
' applied to which is not to be elid-
cd even though the word be used
in the plural number.
स!
(1) second letter of the यण् class
( semi-vowels ) which has got the
properties नादभागित्व, घोषवत्त्व,' संवृतत्व
and अल्पप्राणता i. e. it is a sonant,
imaspirate consonant Regarding
its स्थान or place of production,
there is a difference of opinion :
generally the consonant º is looked
upon as a cerebral or lingual letter
(मूर्धन्य); cf ऋटुरषाणां मूर्ध， S.K.also Pan.
Siksa; but it is called by some as
दन्त्य or दन्तमूलीय: cf रेफस्तु दरये दन्तमूले
बा RT. 8, by others as दन्तमूलीय and
and by still others as बत्र्य gingival.
In the Vajasaneyi-Pratisakhya it is
described as दन्तमूलीय: cf रो दन्तमूल
I. 68, while in the Taittiriya Pra-
tiºkhya it is said to be produced
by the touch of the middle part of
the tip of the tongue just above
the root of the teeth;cf. रेपे जिह्वाग्रमध्येन
प्रत्यग्दन्तमूलेभ्यः T. Pr. II. 41; (2) sub-
stitute र् (रेफ ) for the final letter
of the word अहृन्, as also for the
, final of अग्नस्, ऊधस्, अवस् and भुवस्
optionally with रु, which ( रु) is
dropped before vowels, and chang-
ed to ओ before अ and soft cons0-
mants, while it is changed into
visarga before hard consonants and
surds.e.g. अग्रव, अस्र एवः ऊधरेव, ऊधएव:
cf. Kas. on P. VIII, 2-70: (3) the
रक्त lit. coloured i.e.
Panini's grammar ) which is substi-
tuted for the consonant सु and for
the consonant º of the word अहृन्
when the consonant स् or न् stands
at the end of a word. This substi-
tute रु, unlike the substitute र् is
liable to be changed intovisarga, or
the consonant य्, or the vowel उ
by P. VIII.3.15, 17, VI.1.113, 114.
र (l) the consonant र, generally cited
as रेफ; the vowel अ is added to र्
for facility of utterance: cf. T. Pr.'
I.21 ; (2) shortterm ( प्रत्याहृार ) for
र् and ; cf. उरण् रपरः, P. I. 1.51:
(3) kt affix र applied to the roots
नम्, कम्प् etc. in the sense of agent
who is habituated to, or expert in
the action expressed by the root:
e. g, नम्रः, कम्प्र:; cf. नमिकम्पिस्म्यजसकम-
हिंसदीपो रः P. III. 2. 167; (4) tad.
affix र as a Caturarthika affix
applied to the words headed by
अद्मन्: e. g. अमर:; cf. बुच्छण्o P. IV.
2. 80; (5) tad affix र in the sense
of possession affixed to the words
ऊष, सुषि, मुष्क, मधु, and तमस् with अ of
तमस् changed to इ: e. g. ऊषरम्,
सुषिरम्, मधुर:, तमिस्रा: cf. Ks on.
P.V. 2.]07 and 114: (6) tad. afix र
in the sense of diminution affixed
to the words कुटी, इामी and शुण्डा: e.g.
कुटीर:, इामीर, दुण्डार:: cf. Kas. on P.
V. 3. 88: (7) tad. affix रक् which
see below; (8) krt affix रक् which
see below; (9) a term for द्विगुसमास in
the Jainendra Vyakarana.
रक् (1) tad.afixरproposed by theWar-
ttikakra instead of अारक् for being
affixed to the word गोधा to form
the word गौधरः: cf. आरग्वचनमनर्थकं
रका सिद्धत्वात् P.IV.1.130 Vart. 1 ; (2)
krt affix रक् applied to the root ज्या;
cf. रकेि उयः प्रसारणम् P. I.1.4 Vart. 6.
coloured by
nasalization: a term used by
ancient grammarians for a nasar
consonant र (technically called रु in | Iized letter ( अनुनासिक ); cf रक्र्त्

रक्तपाद 297
रनु .
नुनासेक: R.Pr.r.17on which Uvvata |रण्same as र् being only a variant.
comments :-- अनुनासक्रौ वणे . रक्त
इत्युच्यत; also cf. अरक्तसंध्यत्यपवाद्यते पदं
R. Pr, XI. 18, where unnasa-
lized अा is stated as अरक्तसंधि and
illustrated by the commentator }
by guoting the passage मन्द्रमा- |
वरेण्यम् as contrasted with अभ्र औ !
अप: !
रक्तपाद conventional name given to |
the second pda of the fourth ;
Adhyaya of Painis Astadhyayi as ]
the Pada begins with the Stra तन !
रक्तं रागात् P. IV. 2.1. -
रक्षित named मैत्रेयराक्षत or मैत्रेय also; a !
famous grammarian of the Eastern !
school of grammarians which
fourished in Bihar and Bengal in .
the ninth, terth, eleventh and !
twelfth centuries, claiming मैत्रयरक्षित, !
पुरुषेत्तमद्व, सीरदेव and others as pro-
minent grammar schglars among !
others. See the word मैत्रेयराक्षत. |
रधुनाथ a grammarian of the seven-
teenth century, who was a pupil
of Bhagtoj Diksita and who wrote
a small gloss ( लधुभ:ष्य ) on the
topic named * पञ्चसंधि * of the Sidd-
hantakaumudf.
रङ्ग nasalisation; colouring ofa letter
by its nasalisation: cf. रङ्गवर्ण श्रयुञ्जीरन्
नौ ग्रसेत् पूर्वमक्षरम् Pan. Sks. 27.
रङ्गनाथ agrammarian,sonofनारायणयज्वा,
who wrote a commentary named
मकरन्द on Haradatta's Padamajjari. |
रजतादि a class of words headed by
the word रजत to which the tadd-
hita affix अ ( अतः ) is added in the
sense of * a product ' or a part ';
e.g. राजतम् , लौहृम् , औदुम्बरम् etc. ; cf.
K™. on P. IV.3.154. _
र¶ tad. affix र causing viddhi, appli-
ed to the word अग्नीध्राः in the sense
of Sarana i.e. a room or a place;
See रञ्ज.
रत्नपाणे a grammarian of the eight*
' eenth century who wrote a short
treatise on the Karaka relations
named षट्कारकविवरण.
रत्नार्णव name of a commentary on
the Siddhantakaumudi written by
Krspamitra, a famous grammarian
and Naiyayika who lived in the
eighteenth century and wrote
many commentary works On books
in the Vyakarana and Nyāya
Sstras.
रत्तेइ a grammarian who wrote a
grammar work named लक्षणसंग्रहृ,
रथ name of one of the eight kinds of
recitals of the Veda Sarhhita by
dividing it into the component
words ( पद ) and reciting the
component words by repeating
them, in their regular order
and reverse order too.
रदानु t affix रदानु applied to the
r6o जीव्: e.g. जीरदानुः;cf. जीवे रदानुक् !
जीरदानु: M. Bh. on Siva Stºtra ,
Vart. 5. _
रघादि a class of eight roots headed
by the root रध् which allow the
addition of the augment इ ( इट् )
optionally to the ardhadhatuka
affix beginning with any conson*
ant except य्, placed , after them;
e.g. राधेतां रद्ध, त्रता , तत् तातां ctc.
cf. P.VII.2.35 and VII.2.45.
एन् personal ending रन् substituted for
the personat ending इम of the
प्रथमपुरुष (third person) Atmanepada
of lif' (potential and benedictive);
cf. इतस्य रन् P.[ II. 4.105.
रनु [RENOU,LOUIS] a sound Sans-
krit scholar of France of the present
time who has written sotne trea-
e.g. अाह्मीघम् cf. अज्ञध: इरोणे रञ् भे च
P. IV.3.120 Vart, 9.
38
tises and many articles on Sanskrit
grammar out of which his works
6n the Terminology of Sanskrit

रूपंर
298
राजन्याद्
Grammar, Kasik and Durghata-
vptti reguire a special mention.
रपर with the letter र inserted after
it; the term is used in connection
with the guna and vrddhi substi-
tutes for ऋ. These substitutes are
respectively अ and अा, which, by
the addition of र्, always become
अर्and अार्: cf उरण् रपरः P.I. 1. 51,
cf. ऋकारस्य गुणवृद्वीं रेफाळोखा अरुरावेवेति
cf. also वृद्धिर्भवतिं गुणो भवतीति रेफशिरा
गुणवृद्धिसंज्ञकेभिनिर्वर्तत; M.Bh. on P.VI.
4.121, VIII.2.42.
रप्रत्याहाररवण्डन a small article show-
< ing that the short term र for the
consonants ， and ढ need not be
advocated as done by the learned
old grammarians.The treatise was
Written by Vaidyanatha Paya--
gunde, the prominent pupil of
Nagesabhatta.
रमत्याहृारमण्डन an anonymous work,
comparatively modern, refuting
the arguments advanced in the
रप्रत्याहृारखण्डन by Vaidyanatha Pya-
gunde.
रम् augment र inserted after the
vowel अ of the root भ्रस्ज्, when the
letterर् which is already present
in भ्ररुज् (before अ) and the penulti-
mate स् are dropped; the result is
that the word भर्ज, in short, be-
comes substituted in the place of
नरुज्: cf. भ्ररुजे रोपधये रमन्यतरस्याम्P.VI.
. 4.47, and भ्रस्जे रोपधयेलेप अागमे रम्
विघींयते as Bharadvjya Varttika
' thereon. _
| रमानाथइाम a grammarian of the
, Katantra school who lived in the
fifteenth century and wrote a
, commentary named Manorama
on the Katantradhatuvptti and
, .. Sabdasadhyaprayoga.
, ए¶.a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) used for
{ all consonants excepting य् and व्:
[ cf रलेो व्युपधाद्धलादेः संश्च, P.I.2.26.
ख्र् personal ending of the third pers.
( प्रथमपुरुष ) substituted for the affix
इि in the first future ( लुट् ): cf. बुट:
प्रथमस्य डारौरस: II.4.85.
रसवर्तीं name of a commentary on
his own work * Sanksiptasra Vya-
karana by KramadiSvara,a sound
scholar of grammar in the thir-
teenth century A.D.
रसादि a class of words headed by the
word रसं which have the tad.affix
मतुप् added to them in the sense
of possession in preference toother
affixes like इन्: e.g.. रसवान् , रूपवान्
' etc.; cf. KS. on P.V. 2.95. _
राघवेन्द्रचार्य ( गजेन्द्रगडकस्) a famons
scholar of Grammar in the nine-
teenth century, who taught many
pupils and wrote some commen-
tary works, the well-known being
प्रभa on the Sabdakaustubha,
विषमपदव्याख्या on the Laghusabden-
dusekhara and त्रिपथगां on the
Paribhisendusekhara. For details
see p. 27 Vyakarana Mahbhasya
Vol. VII D. E. Society's Edition.
राजद्न्तादि a class of compound words
headed by राजदन्त in which the
order ofwords or the constituent
members is fixed. There are about
50 words in the class; some of
them are tatpurusa compounds
such as राजदूत or अग्रवण in which
the subordinate word which ought
to have been placed first is placed
second There are some karmadh-
raya.compounds in which one par-
ticular word is always placed first
and not any one of the two: e.g.
लितवाासतम्, सिक्तसंमृष्टम् etc. There are
some dvandwa compounds such as
उदूखलमुसलम् , चित्रास्वाती, भार्यापती etc.
in which a definite order of words
is laid down. For details see Ksik
on राजदन्तादिषु परम् P. II. 2.31.
राजन्यादि a class of words headed by
the word राजन्य to which the

राजारामशास्त्री
299 रामचन्द्रभ तरे
taddhita affix अक्र ( बुच् ) is added
in the sense of * the place of re-
sidence '; e. g. राजन्यंकः, औदुम्बरक: !
etc. This class named राजन्येादि is ]
called अाकृतिगण and similar words !
can be included in this class such
as मालव,द्विराट् , त्रिगर्त and others from
which the words माळवक्र: वैराटक:
त्रैगर्तक: etc. can be arrived at cf.
Ka8. on P. IV. 2.53.
राजाराम्ााखी ( कालैक्रर् ) a reputed
scholar of Sanskrit grammar who
resided at Warras and establish-
ed a school of Sanskrit Gramma-
rians there in the nineteenth
century. He wrote a treatise on
grammar nam(.d दाब्दव्युत्पत्तिकैौमुदी.
राधाकृष्ण ( गोस्वामी ) a grammarian
who wrote two elementary gra-
umar treatises (1) अव्ययार्थे and (2)
वैयाकरणसर्वस्वसूचीं.
राघवळभ titled तर्कपञ्चानन, who wrote
a commentary named सुवेधिनौ on
the Mugdhabodha Vyakarana.
राम or रामभढ who wrote a comme-
ntary on the Prakriykaumud of
Ramacandra SeSa.
राम inhabitant of Mithila who wrote
a commentary by name विद्वत्प्रबोधिनी
on the Sarasvata Prakriy.
रामार्ककरसरस्वती a grammarian who
wrote a small grammar treatise
named अायुबेधव्याकरण which is diff-
erent from the well-known अायुबोध
of तारानाथतर्कवाचस्पति.
रामाकोर ( चक्रवर्तीं ) author of (1)
अष्टमङ्गल a commentary on the
कातन्त्रवृति of Durgasirhha, as also of
(2) इाब्दबोधप्रकाशेक्रा, a small work on
the import of words.
रामच्रुषण a grammarian who wrote a
treatise on Karaka relationsknown
by the name शाब्दबोधप्रक्रिया.
|्मकूषणभट्ट a grammarian of the 17th
century who wrote वैयाकरणसिद्धान्त-
रूनाक्रर्, a commentary on the diffe-
rent portions of the Siddhānta
Kaumudf.
रामकृष्णानन्द् writer of a commentary
on the Mahabhsya which is
available in a fragmentary form.
रामचन्द्र (1) रामन्वन्द्राचार्य (son of कृष्णाचार्य)
the well-known author of the
Prakriyakaumudi. He belonged to
the Sea family and the latter half
of the fifteenth century is assigned
as his date. He is believed to have
been a resident of Andhra. His
work, the Prakriyakaumudi, was a
popular grammar treatise for some
time before Bhaggoj's Siddhanta-
Kaumudi got its hold, and it had
a number ofcommentaries written
upon it especiaily by his descen-
dants and members of his family
which became well-known as the
Sesa family of grammarians. The
Prakriyakaumud is named कृष्णार्क-
करप्राक्रिया also. (2) There was a gra-
mmarian named Ramacandra who
wrote a small treatise on grammar
named विदग्धबोध. (3) There was
another grammarian of the same
name who was a pupil of NgeSa-
bhaga of the eighteenth century
and who wrote asmall commentary
called वृतिसप्रेहु on Panini's Asadh-
yayi. (4) There was also another
Ramacandra who was a scholar
of Vedic grammar and who wrote
the commentary named ज्येाल्ना on
the Vjasaneyi-PrtiSikhya.
रामचन्द्र दीक्षित a grammarian who
wrote (l) Undikosa, ( 2 ) Mani-
dipika, a commentary on the Una-
disitras, and (3) Sabdabhedaniti-
pana. _
रामचन्द्रभढ तरंone of the senior pupils
of Nagesabhatta who was a teacher
of Vaidyanatha Payagunde. He
wrote a small gloss on the ASadh-
yay which i named पाणिनिसूत्रवृत्ति

रामचन्द्र्ोष
He lived in the first half of the
eighteenth century and taught
several pupils at Varmasi.
रामचन्द्राष See रामचन्द्र (1).
रामचन्द्रसरस्वती pupil of वासुदेवेन्द्रसरस्वती
of the sixteenth century who has
written a gloss named विवरण on the
Mahabhasyapradipa of Kaiyata.
रामतर्कवागीशा a learned grammarian
who held the titles महामर्होपाध्याय and
भट्टाचार्य, He was an advocate of the
Mugdhabodha School and wrote
commentaries on (1) the Mugdha-
bodha, (2) the Kavikalpadruma,
(3) the Amarak08a and (4) the
Umadi stras. He also wrote a
short gloss on case-relations, his
treatise on the subject being
named कारकटिप्पणी,
रामदास (वक्रवतीं ) a follower of the
Katantra school of grammar who
wrote (l) चन्द्रिका, a commentary
on KatantrapariSista and ( 2 )
कातन्त्रव्याख्यासार
रामनाथ ( चक्रवर्तीं ) who wrote short
glosses on the Katantra and the
Kalpa Vyakarahas.
रामनाथ ( चौबे ) a grammarian of the
nineteenth century who wrote (l)
शब्दनूदुईौखरटीका, (2) वैयाकरणभूषणटीका and
(3) वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तमञ्जूषाटीका.
रामनाथ ( विद्यावाचस्पति ) a Sanskrit
scholar of the 17th century who
studied Vyakarana,. Dharma,
Alarmkra and other Sastras and
wrote a grammar work कातन्त्ररहृस्य,
besides many books on other
Sastras.
* रामनारायण writer of a commentary on
the Sarasvataprakriya.
रामभदृ writer of a commentary on
the Prakriyakaumudi.
' रामभद्र दीक्षित son of यज्ञराम दीक्षित, a
grammarian of Tanjore of the
" "* seventeenth century who wrote a
300
रशि
commentary on the Paribhavrtti
of Siradeva named परिभाषावृत्तिव्याख्या.
He has also written the * life of
Patanjali' ( पतञ्जलिचरित ) and many
miscellaneous works, such as
उणादिमणिदीपिक्रा and others.
रामराम a grammarian who has written
a commentary on the Kavikalpa-
druma ofBopadeva.
रामशार्मा the same as रामतर्कवागीश. See
रमतर्कवागी¶.
रामसिंहृवर्मा possibly the same king of
Srihgaberapura who patronised
Nigesabhatta. He is said to have
written some Small comments on "
the Ramayana and a small gram-
mar work named धातुरत्नमञ्जरी.
रामानन्द् a grammarian of the seven-
teenth century who wrote a com-
mentary on Bopadeva's Mugdha-
bodha. He was possibly the same
as Rimarama (see above) and
Ramānandatirtha who wrote the
Katantrasarhgraha, although diffe-
rent from the well-knowu रामानन्द-
तर्थि of the sixteenth century who
was a sahnyasin and who wrote
many philosophical and religious
booklets.
रामालेकार possibly the same as रामराम
(see above) who wrote Dhatudi-
pika, a commentary on the Kavi-
kalpadruma of Bopadeva.
रामाश्रम a grammarian of the seven-
teemth century who wrote a com-
mentary named Siddhantacandrika
on the Sarasvata Vyakarana.
रामेश्वर a grammarian who wrote a
small compendium on grammar
named शुद्धाद्युबोध.
रा，िा usually used in the sense of a
collection or a heap or a lunar
constellation; the word is often
used after the word वर्ण when it
means the traditional collection of

tरंकू
301
्
letters or the alphabet. The words रिघातिलु tad. affix रिटात् added to ऊध्र्व;
अक्षरराज्ञि, व्रह्मराई and अक्षरसमाम्नाय are ;
also used in the same sense.
रिक् an augment added optionally ;
with रुक् and रीक् to the reduplica- '
tive syllable of the frequentative ;
root from a primitive root which '
ends in ऋ or has a penuitimate ऋ: :
e. g. न्वरिकर्ति, नरिनर्ति भरिभ्रत् etc.: cf. )
रुग्रक्रौ च ढाके, P.WII. 4.9l and ऋतश्च ;
VII.4.92.
खंड substitute रि for a verbal base ;
ending in ऋ before इ (the sign of ;
the 6th conj.) यक् (sign of the pass. !
voice) and a लिङ्क affix beginning :
with य which is nota Sarvadhatuka
affix: e. g. अाद्रियत, क्रियेत, क्रियात्: cf. ख
रिङ्ग् दायग्लिङ्क्षु P.VII.4.28. -
रत् (1) characterized by the mute ;
consonant र् signifying the acute ;
accent for the penultimate vowel;cf. !
उपेोत्तमं रिति P. VI. ]. 217: ( 2 ) ;
the same as रित or रेफ, a visarga :
which is changeable into र् when !
euphonically combined: cf. !
विसर्जनीये राित: V.Pr.I.160; cf. also ;
भाव्युपधे च रािद्वसर्जनीयान्तानि रेपेण: V.Pr. !
VII.9. The terms राित, रेतः and रित् !
are given in the Padaptha to a पद
or word which ends in a Visarga
which has originated from √ in the ;
Sarhhitapatha; e. g. the Visarga
in कः, प्रात: etc.; cf. R.Pr.I.30 to 32.
रिफित (1) a Visarga in the Padap:ha
" which has originated from र् in the
Sarhhiti-ptha; (2) a word or
pada which has got a रिफत at its
end; cf क:, स्व: भ्रात: etc. (which in
the Samhitpatha are कर् , स्वर् , प्रातर्
etc.;) cf R.Pr. I.30 to 36 V.Pr.IV.
18.192.
रिट् tad. affix रैि added optionally |
with रिष्टात् to the word ऊर्धवे which
becomes changed into उप: e.g.उपरि,
उपरिष्टात्: cf. ऊध्र्वस्य उपभावो रिरिष्टातिलौ
* P.V.3.31 Wrt, 1. _
| रीड substitute री for the vowel ऋ at
see रि.
_ रीक् augment री added optionally with
रुक् and रिक् to the reduplicative syll-
able ( अभ्यास ) of the frequentative
base of roots having ऋ as their
penultimate vowel; e.g. वरीवृश्च्यते
वरीवृश्रीति, नरीनर्ति, चरीकर्ति: cf रीगृदुपधस्य
च P.VII. 4.90.
the end of a base ( अङ्ग ) before
the affix चि as also before य which
does not belong to a krt or Sarva-
dhatuka affix: e.g. मत्रीभूतः, मात्रीयत;
cf रीङ् ऋतः P.VII.4.27.
(1) substitute र् for the consonant
स् at the end of a word as also for
the बु of सजुष् , न् of अहृन् and option-
ally with र् for the final स् of अग्नस्,
ऊधम् and अवस्in Weda; e.g. अहििरत्र,
वायुरत्र, सजूदेवेभ: cf. P.VIII.2.66; the
र् of this रु (as contrasted with the
substitute ， which see above) is
further changed into उ before a
soft consonant and before the
vowel अ provided it is preceded by
the vowel अ, while र् , prescribed
as substitute र (which see above),
* remains unchanged : e g. दिवेींच्यै:,
शिवो वन्द्य: as contrasted with अहृरत्र,
अहृर्गण:; (2) substitute र् for the final
जु of अवयज् (e. g, अवयाः), for हृ of
श्वतवद् (e.g. श्वतवां:), and for डुप् of पुरोडाद्
(e.g. पुगेडा:) before the case affix सु;
cf.P.VIII.4.67;(3)substitute र् (or द्)
for the final स् or द् of a verb-form
ending with the personal ending
सिg of the 2nd pers. sing; cf. P.
VIII.2.74,75;(4)substitute र् for the
final न् of words ending with the
affix मत् or वस् in Weda; e.g. मरुत्व:
हृरिब: : cf. Kas. on P.VIII.3.1: (5)
substitute र् for the final न् at the
end of a word when it is followed
by a छव् letter i,e. the first ora
second consonant excepting and

रुक् 302
रूपमाला
%; e.g. भवांश्रिनीत: cf. P.VIII. 3.7; | रूढः convention; usage; custom. The
(6) substitute for the final न्of जून्
before the letter प् as also for the
final न् of स्वतवान् and कन् under
certain conditions; cf. P. VIII.3.
10.12.
रुक् augment र्added optionally with
word रूढि is given along with योग
( derivation ) as the basis of the
use of words which are described
to be of four kinds; see रूढ above.
cf. नेगमरूढिभवं हि सुसाधु P. III 3. 1.
Vart. 1. -
रिक् to the reduplicative syllable; | रूप (1) word-form which is complete
(see रिक् above); e.g- चर्कर्ति, नर्नर्ति:
cf P. VII. 4. 91, 92 as also VII.
4.65.
खक्मन् the primary Yama letter: a
term used in the Siksa treatises.
खद् augment , prefixed to the pers.
ending इ of the प्रथमपुरुष (3rd pers.
plural) after the root √ी, विद् and in |
Wedic literature after a few other
roots e.g्रोते, सेचिद्रते,अदुहृ;cf दांडेो रुट्:
P.VII. 1.6-8. _
रुदादि a term used for the five roots |
headed by the root रुद्,which have
the augment इ added to a Sarva-
dhatuka affix in certain cases; e.g.
with प्रकृति ( the base ) and प्रत्यय, i.e.
the affix which is attached to it;
cf. रूपानग्रहृश्र इब्दस्य नान्तरण लौकिकं प्रयोगम्
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.22 Vart. 3; cf.
also the usual expression का रूपसिद्धिः
in the Mahabhasya; cf. M. Bh.
on I. 1.51, 1.2.58 etc. ; the word
is also used in the sense of a
word-base ( धातु or प्रातिपदिक ); cf. स्वं
रूपं इब्दस्याज्ञाव्दसेज्ञा P. I. 1.68; (2) the
word form as characterized by its
derivation and properties cf. तस्य
रूपान्यल्च वर्णान्यत्वम्explained as तस्य
इाब्दस्य अनुप्रदानादिभिः कर्णे रूपभेद जन्यमान
वर्णभद्रः संपद्यत T. Pr. XXII. 2.
रेदिति, श्वासेति, अरोदीत्, अस्वपत् etc.; cf. | रूपनारायण a grammarian of Bengal
P.VII. 2. 76, VII.3.98.
रुद्रदेव a grammarian whohas written
a commentary on the Waiyka-
raja-Siddhānta-Bhisana of Konda-
bha!a.
of the fifteenth century who wrote
short comments on some sections
of the Supadma Vyakarana under
the names सुपद्मषट्कारक and सुपद्यसमास-
संग्रहृ.
रुघादि a class of roots headed by the l रूपप् tad. affix in the sense of praise'
root रुध् which take श्रम् ( न् ) as the |
conjugational sign inserted after
the final vowel, e. g. रुणद्धि ( where
रुध् becomes रुणध् ). These roots are
popularly called roots of the 8th
conjugation.
रू conventional; traditional; one of
the four senses in which words are
used. The senses are यौगक (deriva-
tive ), रूढ (conventional), योगरूढ and
यौगकंढ: The term रूढ is also used
which is, in fact, possessed by the
word to which the affix रूपप् is
added, without making any
change in the sense of the word,
the affix being called 'स्वार्थे' i. e.
an affix in the sense of the base
or प्रकृति cf.स्वार्थिकाः प्रत्ययाः प्रकृत्यर्थविशेषस्य
द्योतका भवन्ति | प्रज्ञास्तीवैयाकरणीवैयाकरणरूपः !
याज्ञिकरूप: । प्रकृत्यर्थस्य वैशिष्ट्ये प्रशंसा भवति !
वृषलरूपीयं य: पलाण्डुना सुरां पिबति | चेररूप: !
Kas. on P. V. 3.66.
in the sense of ' a conventional | रूपमाळा (1) an elementary work on
_
word ' cf. प्रथमांशादंी विभक्तिविंशंष रूट्:
Kas. on P. VI. 1.102.
रूढt Sarhhitaptha, as contrasted with
the Padapatha
Sanskrit grammar composed by
Wimalasarasvati, in which the
Sप्tras of Panini are arranged in
different topics many of which are

रूपासाङ्ग
303
रीफन्
called माला, such as अजन्तमाला,
हृलन्तमाला, छान्दसमाला, अब्ययमाला and s0
on.(2) the name रूपमाला is also found ;
given to a work giving collections
of formed words written by Pu-
yanandana.
रूपसिद्धि lit, the formation of words;
the name रूपासिद्वि is given to a small
literary work on the formation of
words written by Dayanandasa-
raSvat.
रूपातिदेशा the actual replacement of
the original in the place of the
substitute by virtue of the rule
स्थानिवदादेशेनल्विधौ P. I. 1. 56; one of
the two kinds of स्थानिवद्भाव
wherein the word-form of the
original ( स्थानी ) is put in the
place of the substitute (अद्); the
other kind of स्थानिवद्भाव being call-
ed कार्यातिदेशा by means of which
grammatical operations caused by
the original ( स्थानी ) take place
although the substitute (अद्) has
been actually put in the place of
the original. About the interpre-
tation of the rule द्विर्वन्वनचि P.
I.1.59, the grammarians accept
the view of रूपातिद्: cf. रूपातिंदढश्चायं
नियतकालस्तेन कृत द्विर्वचन पुन: अददारूपमे-
वावातष्ठते ' पपतुः पपुः | अाते लेीप इटि च
इत्याकारलेोपे कृत तस्य स्थानिवद्भावात् एकान्वेो
द्वo इति द्विर्वचनं भवति Ks on P.D.1.59;
cf.also रूपातिदाश्चायम् , द्विर्वचनवि इत्य-
त्रास्य भाष्य पाठात्	Pari. Bhaskara
Pari. 97. For details see Mahabh-
sya on P.VII.1.95 96.
रूपवतर a well-known work on word
formation written by धर्मकीर्ति a.jain
grammarian of the twelfth century.
Scholars believe that this work
was the first work of the form of
topics which was taken as a model
by the authors of the Prakriyakau-
mud and the Siddhantakaumudi.
रूप्य (l) a tad. affix applied to a word
rmeaning * a cause ' or expressing
* a human being ' in the sense of
*proceeding therefrom e.g. समादागतं
समरूप्यम् देवदत्तरूप्यम् ; cf._ हेतुमनुष्य-
भ्येन्यतरस्यां रूप्यः P. IV. 3.8 ; (2) a
tad.affix applied to a word in the
genitive case in the sense of भूतपूर्वे,
* formerly belonging to '; e. g.
देवदत्तस्य भूतपूर्वं गौः देवंदत्तरूप्य:: cf. Ks.
on षष्ठ्या रूप्य् च P. V. 3.54.
| त्रे word-form of the ajbhakti or
svarabhakti ( a term used in the
ancient Pratisakhya works), where
ऋ is looked upon as the consonant
र् surrounded by, or followed by
the nature of a vowel. ऋ as a
vowel is possessed of one matra
of which in svarabhakti, the con-
sonant र् possesses half and the
svarabhakti possesses half: cf रेफात्
खरोपहिताद्यञ्जनोदयाद् ऋकारवर्णा स्वरभाक्तरुत्तरा
R. Pr. WI.13.
रे (रे|्) personal ending in Wedic
Literature, substituted for त of the
प्रथमपुरुष ( 3rd pers. ) plural in the
Perfect tense; cf. लिटस्तझये रेद् ईरेच्
P. III. 4.81. - _
रेखा termed also *लखा '; one of the
subdivisions of the krama-pagha.
रेफ the consonant र्; generally the
wordरेफ is used for र and not रकार:
cf. वर्णात्कार: । रादिकं: P.III.3.108 Vart.
3,4.The consonant र is described as
one pronounced like the tearing of
a piece of cloth and resembling a
snarl or a growl: cf. रिभ्यते विपाटयत
वस्त्रादिपाटनध्वनिवदुचार्यते इति रेफ: |
रेफशिरस् ( the guga or the wrddhi
substitute for ऋ viz. अर् or अार्)
with the letter र् represented in
script by a sign on the top : e. g.
अर्कः, अजेवम्; cf. वृद्धिर्भवति गुणे भवतीति
रेफशिंरा गुणवृद्धिसंज्ञकंोsभिनिर्वर्तते M.Bh, on
P. VI.4,121. _
रेफिन् a term applied(1)to the Visarja-
sniya letter preceded by any vowel

रेवत्यादि
304
ळ
excepting अ and अा, ( 2 ) to the
Visajaniya preceded by अ in
some specified words such as
प्रातः, भाः, अविभः, अाद:, क्र: ctc. under
certain conditions, as also, (3) to
the Visarjaniya in ईात:, सानत: etc
For details see R. Pr. I.30-36.
रेवत्यादि a class of words headed by
the word रवती to which the affix
ठक् is added in the sense of * an
ofspring ': e. g. रेवतिक्र:, आश्वपालिक:,
द्वारपालिंक्र: etc.cf.KS. on P. IV.1.146.
किचतिकादि a class of words headed by
रैबातक to which the taddhita affix
ईय ( छ ) is added in the sense of
* belonging to ' e. g. रैवतिकीय:,
ओोद्वाहृीयः, वैजवापीय: etc, cf Kas. om
P. V. 3.131.
रोमशा one of the faults in pronunci-
ation: cf. प्रगीत उपगीतः क्ष्क्ण्णेि रोमह्या इति
M. Bh I. 1. Ah. 1.
से personal ending substituted for the
प्रथमपुरुषद्विवचन ( 3rd pers, dual
affix तस्) in the periphrastic or first
future;e. g. कर्तरै: cf. लुटः प्रथमस्य
डारौरसः P. II. 4.85.
a term jocularly used with the
word वृत preceding it,for students
of a famous scholar named धृतरौढि;
cf ओदनपाणिनीया: घृतरौढयिा: M. Bh. on
P. 1.1.73.
S
र्यादि another name given to the
क्रौड्यादि class of words which are
headed by क्रौडि and which take the
affix ष्यङ्क to form their base in the
feminine; e. g. क्रौड्या लाडया;.cf. सिद्धं तु
रो c । के पुना रैक्यादयः
य क्रौड्यदेय: M. Bh. on P. IV. 1.79.
SA
रोधादिक a root belonging to the
class of roots headed by रुध् which
take the conjugational sign न् (श्रम्).
See रुधादि above.
ईळ (I) a tad. affix termed also धिभक्ति
which is applied to the word इद्भदः in
the sense of the locative case, the
word इदम् being changed into एत;
|
e. g. एतर्हि cf. इदमी र्हि P. V. 3.16
and एततौ रथे: P. V. 3.4. (2) tad.
affix applied in Veda to तत् and
other pronouns: e.g.तर्हि, क्रर्हि, यार्ह, cf.
P. V. 3.20, 21.
ल
(1 ) a consonant of the dental class
which is a semi-vowel ( यण् ) with
liquid contact in the mouth, and
which is inaspirate ( अल्पप्राण ),voic-
ed ( घीष ) and both nasalised and
unnasalised; (2) name in general
( लकार ) given to the personal
endings applied to roots in the
ten tenses and moods which take
different substitutes ति, त:, अान्त etc,
and have various modifications and
augments in the different tenses
and moods; (3) substituted as a .
semivowel ( यण ) for the vowel
ल followed by any other vowel
in the euphonic combinations;
(4)applied at the beginning of non-
taddhita affixes as a mute letter
indicating the acute accent for
the vowel preceding the affix:
cf. लिति : P. VI. 1.193; ( 5 )
substituted for त्, थ्, द्, घ् or न्
before ， cf. P.VIII.4. 60; (6) subs-
tituted under certain conditions for
the consonant र् (a) of the root क्प्,
(b) of prefixes ， and परा before the
root अय्, (c) of the root गृ in fre-
quentative forms and optionally
before affixes beginning with a
vowel, and (d ) of the word परि
before घ and अङ्क; cf. P. VIII. 2. 18
to 22. _
ल (l) consonant ल्; see º above'
(2) a general term usually used
by ancient grammarians to signify-
लेीप (elision or disappearance) of
a letter or a syllable or a word: cf.
सर्वसादेर्दिगेश्र ळ: सवार्तक्र:, द्वितन्त्र: M.
Bh. on P.IV.2.60 (3) tad. affix

ठकार 305 लधुता
- - -
ल added to the word छिन्न when , written a booklet on the six dia-
चि and पिळ are substituted for the | lects, which is named षड्भाषाचन्द्रिका-
word कुल: e.g, चिल्छः, पिछ: cf. P. V. लक्ष्मीनृसिंह a grammarian of the
2.33 Vart 2. eighteemth century who has
ळक्र् (l) the consonant ल्.; see ल् (1) written (l) Siddhantakaumudi-
above; (2) the personal endings vilasa, a commentary on the
affixed to roots; see ल् (2). Siddhantakaumudi and(?)TriSikha,
लक्षण (1) a rule or a sutra composed a commentary on NageSa's Pari-
by the ancient Sणेitrakras; bhasendusekhara.
the word is very frequently used | लथ्य lit. target;illustration;example
in this sense by the Bhasya- I of a grammatical rule: cf. लक्ष्ये लक्षणं
kara and later commentators; cf. सकृदेव प्रवर्तत Paribhasव; also लक्ष्यानुसारि
लक्ष्यलक्षणे व्याकरणम् ;cf. also लक्षणे हि नाम | व्याख्यानमेव इारणम् ' Paribhagendu-
ध्वनति, भ्रमति मुहूर्तमपि नावतिष्ठते M.Bh. on sekhara: cf also इाब्दो लक्ष्य: सूत्रं लक्षणम्
P.I.1.3 Vart 10; (2) characteristic M. Bh. on P.I.1.1 Vart. 14.
9， sign.cf लक्षणेनामूिती अभिमुखेP | लक्ष्यार्थे implied sense. See the word
II. 1. 14; cf also P.I.4.90 andIII. लक्षणा .
2.12 (8) indirect way of eश्Pr्- | लधु (1) a term used in the sense of
sion 9 लशृणश्रुतिपूर्वोक्तयोः प्रतिपदोक्तस्यैव | Tgh or short as contrasted with
प्रहृणम् Par. Sek. Pari. 105. गुरु meaning heavy or long, which
लक्षणप्रतिपदोक्त a short term used for | is applied to vowels like अ, इ etc.
the well-known . Paribhis लक्षणप्रति- cf. हृस्वं लबु P.I. 4. 10; (2) brevity:
दीक्तयेो: प्रतिपदोक्तयैव ग्रहणम् Par. Sek. brief expression;cf. लघ्वर्थं हि संज्ञाकरणम्
Pari. I05, laying down that M.Bh. on P.I.2,27 Wart. 6 also संज्ञा
when a question arises as to which हि नाम यते न लघीय:; (3) small,as qua-
ofthe two words लक्षणीक्त (arrived lifying an effort in writing or
at by certain changes or modifica- explaining something as also in
tions) and प्रतिपदेक्तं, (directly ex-| utterance; cf. ब्येलेधुप्रयत्नतरः शाकटायनस्य
pressed) be accepted, the latter | P.VIII.3.18.
should be preferred. लघुकौमुदी known as लघुसिद्धान्तकौमुदी
लक्षणसग्रह a work on grammar also, an abridged work based
written by a grammarian named upon the Siddhantakaumud of
रत्नदा. Bhattoj Diksita, written by
लक्षणा implication: potentiality of| Bhagtoj's pupil Varadarja. The
implication; this potentiality of work is very valuable and helpful
words viz. लक्षणा is not recognised to beginners in grammar. It has
by grammarians as a potentiality got the same topics as the Siddh-
different from the अभिधाशक्ति or the antakaumudi, but arranged
power of denotation. Later gra- [ differently. The work, named सर-
mmarians, however, like the सिद्धान्तकौमुदी is the same as लधुसिद्धान्त-
Alarhkarikas, have used the word कौमुदी.Possibly सारसिद्धान्तकौमुदी was the
in the sense of potentiality of original name given by the author.
implication as different from that लधुता smallness of effort as contrast-
9fdenotation;.cfः अन्त्यशब्द लक्षणा न च | d with गुरुता: cf. तत्राप्ययं नावश्यं
Paribhagendusekhara. गुरुलधुतामेवोपलक्षयितुमर्हति, M.Bh. on P.
लक्ष्मणसूरि a grammarian whe has ! I.1.3 Wart. 7.
39

लधुन्यास 306 लघुशब्देन्दुशेखरव्याख्या
लधुन्यख (I) short wrifing, brief Kondabhatta's Vaiyakaranabhत्-
putting in, brief expression cf.
, सेयमर्वे लधुना न्यासेन सिद्धे etc.: (2) the
word is given as a name to a
grammatical work, written by
देवेन्द्रसूरि on the इब्दानुशासन of Hema-
candra, possibly in contrast with
the बृहृन्न्यास written by Hemacandra
himself or i with Kasikavivarana-
pafijika popularly called न्यास
written by Jinendrabuddhi on the
Kasikavrtti of Jayditya and
Wamana. See न्यास.
लधुपरिभाषावृात an independent work
on Paribhaas written by Puruso-
, ttamadeva in the twelfth century
A. D. called लधुपरिभाषावृत in con-
trast with the वृहृत्परिभाषावृत of सीरदेव.
The V!tti is named ' Lalita ' also,
by the author.
लधुपक्रिया name of a grammar tre-
atise based on the Sabdanussana
of Hemacandra written by
Vinayavijaya where the sutras 6f
cmacandra are arranged in
different topics as in the Siddhव्रn-
takaumudi of Bhotoj.
लघुप्रयत्नतर reguiring still less efort
for utterance than that required
for the usual utterance; the term
is used in connection with the
Utterance of the consonant य् which
issubstituted for Visarga following
uPonlong अा and followed by any
vowel In such cases य् is no
Pr9nounced at all according to
Sakalya, while it is somewhat
audiby Pronounged according to
Sakatyana: cf. ब्येीलेधुमयत्नतरः इार्कटा-
यनस्य P. VIII. 3.18.
लधुभूषणकान्ति mame of a commen-
tary work by Harivallabha on
Kondabhatta's Vaiykaranabh∂-
: Sahasra.
लधुभूषणदर्पण or' लधुदर्पणा name ofa
9ommentary by Mannudeva on
5anasara.
लघुमञ्जूषा name of an independent
work on the meaning of words
and their interpretation written by
NageSa of which the परमलघुमञ्जूषा is
a popular short extract by tha
author himself.
लधुराब्द्रत्न name of a commentary
on Bhattoji's Manoram by hi
grandson Hari Diksita, which is
generally read together with the
Manoram, by students upto the
end of the Kraka Chapter after
they have completely read and
rmastered the Siddhantakaumud,
The commentary is called लबु-
झब्दरत्न which dlfferentiates it from
the वृहृच्छब्दरत्न written by the same
author viz. Hari Diksita.
लधुश्ाब्देन्दुशेखर name of a comme-
ntary on Bhattoj's Siddhanta-
kaumudi written by Nagesa
Bhatta, the stalwart Grammarian
of the eighteemth century. The
work is named लबुढाब्देन्दुशेखर which
differentiates it from the author's
another work वृहृच्छब्देन्दुशेखर of which
the former is an abridgment. As
the study of the Laghusabdendu-
Sekhara is very common and as the
Brhatabdendusekhara is seldom
studied, it is always the Laghusa-
bdendusekhara that is understood
by the simple and popular
name Sekhara.
लघुइाब्देन्दुशेखरव्याख्या a commentary
on the Laghusabdendusekhara.
There are more than a dozen
commentary works on the popu-
lar Laghusabdendusekhara called
by the usual names टीका or याख्या
the prominent among which are
गदा, मैरवी and बिजया. A few
of them have special names e. g !
चिदस्थिमाला, चन्द्रकला, ज्येीत्स्ना, विषमी etc.

लधुसारस्वत
307
_
ळ.
लधुसारस्वत an epitome of the Saras- .
by कल्याणसरस्वती. !
लघुसिद्धान्तकौमुदी see लबुक्रौमुदी.
ल name given to the affixes of the ;
imperfect tense; cf. अनद्यतने लङ्क P. !
vata Vyakarana,
III. 2.111, explained by Bhaggoji
as भूतानद्यतन लङ् स्यात् in his Siddhanta-
Kaumudi.
ळच्य् tad. affix ल applied optionally
with the affix मतुप् to words ending
in अा and meaning a detachable
or undetachable part of an animal, ;
as also to words mentioned in the
group headed by the word सिध्म,as
also to words वत्स and अस showing
affection and strength respectively ;
e. g. चूडाल:, सिध्मल:, वत्सल:, etc,: cf.
P. V. 2. 96-98.
ळद general personal ending applied
to roots (1 ) to show the present
time for which the personal end-
ings ति त:...महि are substituted for
the formation of verbs and अत्
( र्तृ ) and आन or मान ( दानच् ) for
the formation of the present parti-
ciple: (2) to show past time when
the indeclinablc स्म is used in the
sentence along with the verbal form
or when the undeclinables ननु, न, नु,
पुरा,थावत्, कदा,क्रर्हि etc.are used along
with the verbal form under spe-
cific conditions; e, g. कटं करोति
दवदत:, यजति स्म युधिष्ठिर:, अहं नु क्ररोम,
वसन्तीहु पुरा छात्रा:, यावद् भुङ्क्ते etc.: cf.
P. III. 2.118-123, III. 3.4-9,
लत्व change of र् into ळ. See ल above.
ललितावृत्ति name given to the Pari-
bhasavrtti written by Purusottama-
deva, a famous grammarian of
the Eastern branch of Panini*s
system which prevailed in Bengal
from the eighth to the end of the
twelfth century A.D. See पुरुषोत्तमदव.
ढसा a personal ending sub-
stituted for ， which in certain
cases gets the grave accent in,
spite of the general rule that
affixes ( which include personal
endings ) are acute; cf. तास्यनुद्-
न्डिद्दुपदेशाल्लसार्वधातुकमदृचङ्की: P. VI.
1. 186. _
लाक्षणिक ( 1 ) secondary taken or
understood in the secondary Sense;
(2) stated by a rule ( लक्षण ) cf एर्वे
तहिं न लाक्षणिकस्य स्वरस्य प्रतिषेधं |्ष्मि:
M.Bh, on P. I. 4,2 Vart. 9.
लाघव brevity of expression : ex-
pressing in as few words as possible ;
brevity of thought and conception.
About brevity ofexpression,rules or
stºtras of the ancient Stitrakras are
noteworthy especially those of the
grammarian Panini, whose brevity
of expression is aptly extolled in
the familiar expression अर्ध बन
पुत्रोत्सवं मन्यन्त वैयाकरणा:Par. Sek. Pari.
J22: cf, also in contrast पर्यायद्ब्दानां
लाघवर्गौरचचत्वां नाद्रियते Par.Sek.Pari.115,
लाघवन्याय law of minimisation, par-
simony in the use of words or
parsimony in expression, followed
generally by the Sपंtra writers.
लादेशा substitutes तिपु, तसु इि (अन्ति) सिप्
.....महृिङ्क for , signifying the ten
ल् affixes or lakras लट्, लिट्, लुट् etc.,
applied to roots in the senses of
the different tenses and moods; cf.
P.III.4.78.
लालविहारिन् a grammarian of the
nineteenth century who wrote a
gloss on Nagesa's Paribhisendu-
Sekhara.
लावस्था the original condition of ल् or
the personal endings before the
affixes तिप्, तस् and others are subs-
tituted for them in accordance
with the time or mood, as also the
person and the number in view;cf.
लेावस्थायामेव स्यादयः, सार्वधातुके दयनादयः
M. Bh. on P.III. 1. 33. _
लि a common term used (l) for the
aorist vikaraa affix च्लि for which

लिङ्क
सिच्, क्स, अङ्क etc. are substituted as
prescribed: (2) for लिट् and
लिङ्क affixes; e.g. मन्त्रे घसह्वरणशवृदह्याद्-
वृच्कृगमिजनिभ्यो ले: P.II.4.80.
लिङ्क general term for the affixes call-
cd लिङ्क (optative) which includes
the potential ( विधिलिङ् ) and the
conditional ( अाज्ञीलेिड् ) afixes; .cf.
विधिनिमन्त्रणामन्त्रणाधीष्टसंप्रश्नप्रार्थनषु लिङ्क and
अाशिषि लिङ्कलेटौ P. III. 3.161 and
173.
लिङ्ग (1) sign or characteristic mark:
generally the mute letter prefixed
or suffixed to roots,affixes, or aug-
ments and their substitutes with a
specific purpose; cf. किंचिछिङ्गमासज्य
वक्ष्यामि M. Bh.on I.1.l Vart.7, अवयवे
कृतं छिङ्ग समुदायस्य विशेषकं भवति M. Bh.
on P.I.3.62 Vart. 5; (2) proof, evi-
dence ( प्रमाण ); the word is often
used in the Paribhasendusekhara
and other works in connection
with a rule or part of a rule quot-
ed as an evidence to deduce some
general dictum or Paribhas; (3)
" gender: cf लिङ्ग स्त्रीलिङ्गपुलिङ्गनपुसकानि
KS. on P. II. 3. 46; cf. ( also
प्रतिपादकग्रहणे लिङ्गविशिष्टस्यापि ग्रहणम्. Par.
Sek.Pari.71.Thegender ofa word in
Sanskrit language does not depend
on any specific properties of a
thing; it simply depends on the
current usage; cf लोकाश्रयत्वाल्लिङ्गस्य
which is often quoted in the
Mahabhasya; cf M. Bh. on P.
II. 1.36, II.2.29, II.4.12, IV. 1.3,
V.3.66, V.4.68, VIII.1.15. Fof
details see Mahabhasya on P.IV.1.
3.where after a long enlightening
discussion the definition संस्त्यानप्रसवै
लिङ्गम् is given.
a work on genders by
a southern grammarian अण्णेयान्वायै.
लिङ्गवाचकप्रत्यय an affix such as अा
, ( दृप्, डापृ, चाप्) or ई (डप्, डीषु, डीन् )
which is added to a masculine
base; cf. P.IV. 1.3 to IV.1.77.
308
_ छिद्
लिङ्गविशिष्टग्रहृण inclusion of the femi-
< nine form of a word when a word
in the masculine gender is used in
a rule, for certain operations such
as the application of affixes and
the like;cf the usual dictum rega-
rding this practice viz. the Pari-
bhs.प्रातिपदिकग्रहणे लिङ्गविशिष्टस्यापि ग्रहणम्
Par. Sek. Pari. 7l. as also M. Bh.
on P. IV. 1. l Vart. 5 to Vart, 15
for places of the application of the
dictum and those of its rejection.
लिङ्गविशिष्टपरिभाषा the dictum to
include the feminine form of a
word when in a rule the
word is used in the masculine
gender : प्रतिपादकग्रहणे लिङ्गविशिष्टस्यापि
ग्रहृणम् Par. Sek. Pari. 71. See लिङ्ग-
विदिाग्रहृण.
लिङ्गव्यत्यय transposition of genders,
as noticedoften in Vedic language;
e. g. मधेीर्यहाति or मधोस्तृताः for मधुन:;
cf. M.Bh. on P. I. 4.9.
लिङ्गानुशासन lit. science of genders;a
short comprehensive old treatise on
the gender of words attributed to
Panini as its author. Other works
with the same designation are att-
ributed to वामन, दुर्गतिम and others.
लिङ्गानुशासनटीका name of a commen-
tary on Panini's लिङ्गानुशासन; some
commentaries of this kind are the
लिङ्गथेचन्द्रिका by सुजनपण्डित,लिङ्गार्थ-
चन्द्रिकाप्रकाशा by चकंीर, लिङ्गानुशासनटीका by
दुर्गात्तम and लिङ्गानुशासनटीकां by तारानाथ.
लिङ्गाथेचन्द्रिका See 1ळञ्ज किा.
लिङ्कप्रत्ययार्थे sense of the optative and
the potential moods given or
expressed by affixes under the
common name लिड् prescribed by
PIII.3.16l, 164, 173.
an affix of the perfect tense; cf.
परोक्षे लिट्P.III.2.1I5 for which the
specific affixes णल्, अतुस् उस् etc. are
substituted after roots which take
Pa1asmaipada affixes. Before the lit

छित् 309
छद्
affixes, a monosyllabic root is
reduplicated while dissyllabic roots
and denominative and other
secondary roots, formed by adding
an affix to an original root,take the
affix अाम् after which all *lig per-
the elision by the use of these
letters is the prohibition of any
such operation for the preceding
base as is conditioned by the
elided affix; cf. प्रत्ययलेपे प्रत्ययलक्षणम् |
न लुमताङ्गस्य P.I.1.62,63.
sonal endings are dropped and the | ठक् (I) disappearance (लुच्यते इति युक्);
forms of the roots कृ,भू and अस् with
the necessary personal-endings, are
placed immediately after the word
ending in अाम् , but often with the
intervention of a word or more
in the Vedic language and rarely
in the classical language: cf. तं
पातयां प्रथममास पपात पश्चात्; cf. कास्प्रत्यया-
दाममन्त्रे लिटि P.III.I. 35 to 42.
लित् an affix marked with the mute
a term used by Panini for the
disappearance of an affix or its
part under specified conditions as
prescribed by a grammar rule with
the mention of the word ढक्; e.g.
श्रत्ययस्य लुक्श्लुलुप: P. I. .6] ; (2) aug-
ment ल् added to the root ला in the
sense of melting (an oily thing); cf.
वृतं विललयति. See Ks on P.VII.3.
39.
_S
letter ， such as ल्युट्, ताति्, तल्, तसिल्, ढगेचक्ररण a term used by gramma-
विधळ, भक्तब् etc. where the mute ;
signifies the acute accent for the
. vowel of the base which imme-
diately precedes the affix: e. g.
, चिकीर्षकं:;in which the vowel ईis
acute; cf. लिति WI.1.193.
लित्स्वर the acute accentfor the vowel
immediately preceding the affix
caused by that affix being marked
with the mufe consonant ल्. See
लित् above; cf. अनुदात्तत्वं क्रियतां लित्स्वर
• इति किमत्र कर्तव्यम् M. Bh. on P. II.
4.33.
लीबिज्ञा [ LIEBICH, BRUNO ] : a
European grammarian belonging
to Breslau who lived in the last
quarter of the nineteenth and the
first guarter of the twentieth cen-
tury. He made a critical study of
Sanskrit grammar and edited |
the Candra Wyakarana and the
Ksiratarangii. _
ढ elision of an affix or its part in
rians especially in the Mahabhasya:
(cf. M.Bh. on P.I. 2.4, I.2.12, II.4.
77 etc.) for such roots as have their
Wikarana (conjugational sign) dro-
pped by a rule with the mention
of the word ढक्;e.g. the roots of the ;
second conjugation as contrasted.
with other roots; cf लुग्विकरणालु-
ग्विकरणयेरडग्विकरणस्य Par.SekPari.90.
ठङ्क an affix applied to a root, show-
ing action of immediate past time
as contrasted with affixes called
लिट् or लङ्क. The affix ढङ्क is found
used, however, in the sense of the
past time in general, and irrespe-
ctive of time in Vedic Literature:
cf. छन्दसि लुङ्लङ्लिटः P. III. 4.6. The
comjugational affixes ति, त:, etc.
are substituted for ळङ्क as for the
lakiras of other tenses and moods
and the distinguishing sign or
विकरण is added to a root before
the affix called ळङ्क: cf. च्लि लुठडि and
the following P. III. 1.43 etc.
the process of the formation of a | ळद् general name for affixes of the
word as prescribed by the specific
' mention of the words लुक्, श्लु and
कुप् which have the syllable लु as
common. The specific feature of
first future which are added ' to
roots when the future time is not
the present day, but the next and
the succeeding ones; cfअनद्यतने लृट्

छप्
310
_
ळस्व
P. III. 3.15. The affixes ति, त:
etc. replace the affix लुट् in acco-
rdance with the number and
person in view: cf. तिप्तस्झिासय् .. ..
P. III. 4 78.
डप् disappearance ( डप्यत इति लुप् ): a
ळप्तविकरण a term applied to roots
after which the conjugational sign
is dropped; e. g. roots of the
second and third conjugations; cf.
न लुप्तविकरणेभ्योनुदात्तत्वं भवति, M. Bh.on
P. VI.1. 186.
term used by Pnini with reference ) ढमत् lit. possessed of the syllable or
to the disappearance of an affix
or its part under specified con-
ditions by the express mention of
the word लुप्. Although after the
disappearance of an affix no ope-
ration for the base before, can
take place as conditioned by the
affix, i. e. * although there is no
प्रत्ययलक्षण, still, when the disappe-
aranee is mentioned as ठप्, the
base gets the gender and number
of that original form of it which
existed before the affix, which
has disappeared, was applied; cf.
कुरव: दश:, चचव पुरुष: वचां: cf. लुपि
युक्तवद् व्यक्तिवचन. P. I. 2.51 and
Kasika thereon.
ठप्त that which has been elided or
dropped during the process of
the formation of words As elision
or लेीप is looked upon as a kind
of substitute, in short a 2ero-
substitute, the convention of
the substitute being looked upon
as the original one, vi2.the sthani-
vadbhava, applies to it.
लुठतानिर्दिष्ट supposed to be mentioned
although not seen or heard in a
particular rule, for the sake of
bringing about some grammatical
operation with a view to arriving
atsome desired forms; cf. ट्रान्तस्येत्यत्र
वकारोपि निर्दिश्यते | किं वकारो न श्रूयते |
छननिर्दिष्टो वकारः । M. Bh. om P. I.1.3.
Vart. 10; cf also M. Bh. on I.3.7,
III. 1.44 ete.; also cf. कुति व P. I.
. 1.5 where the consonant ग् is
, supposed to be present in the
word कुतः
wording ठ. The word is applied to
the terms लुक्र, बु, and लुप् which
contain the letter ठ and which all
mean the disappearance of a word-
element; cf. न लुमताङ्गस्य " लुक् श्ङ लुप्
एत कुमन्त: S.K. on P. I. 1.63.
common term for the affixes लँट्
( second Future ) and ड्ड् (condi-
tional), the remnant being ढ after
the mute consonants ङ्क and ढ have
been dropped.
| ढड general term for the personal
affixes of the conditional, which are
applied to a root to show the hap-
pening ofan action only if there was
another preceding action, both the
actions being expressed by ड or
conditional affixes; e.g. देवश्चेदवर्षिष्यत्
सुभिक्षमभविष्यत्: cf. लिङ्कनिमित्तं दृङ् क्रियाति-
पत्तौ P. III.3. 139, 140. कुड् is also
used under certain other condi-
tions when some specific particles
are used: cf. P.III.3.141-146, 151.
छट a general term for the general afix
लु of the second future which is
applied in the sense of future time
in general, without any specific
conditions, the affixes ति, त:, अन्ति
being substituted for the ल् and the
sign (vikarana) स्थ being addcd to
the root; cf. P.III.3.:3 and III. 3.
133. The terminations अत् and अान
are substituted for the affix वृट्
to form future participles; e.g. भवि-
ष्यत्, एधिष्यमाण, cf. लटः सद्वा P.III.3.14.
लेखा one of the varieties or develop-
ments of the क्रमपाठ or the artificial
recitation of the separate words
t of the Sarhhita,
ळ
ट

लेट्
311 ठपबलीयस्त्व
लेद् a general term for the affixes of
the Vedic subjunctive, the usual
personal-endings ति, तस् etc. being
substituted for लट् as in the case
of other tenses and moods. The
augments अट् and आट् are some-
times prefixed to the लट् affix and
the sign ( विकरण ) स् ( सिप् ) is some-
times added to the roots. The
forms ofलट् are to be arrived at as
they are found actually used in |
Vedic language, even by placing
personal-endings of a person or
number different from what is
actually required.
लेशा such a slow or indistinct utter-
ance or pronunciation of the
letter य् or व् preceded by अ,
as shows that it is almost
dropped. This indistinct or slurr-
ed utterance ofय् or व, which is
described as advocated by the
Pratisakhyakara Vatsapra, corres-
ponds to the utterance of य् or वृ
with a very low tone as mentioned
by Panini in the rule ，येालेबुप्रयत्नतर:
शाकटायनस्य; e.g. अाप उन्दन्तुः य जाता
ओषधयः etc.; cf ल् वात्सप्रस्य एतयेोः
T.Pr. 10.23; cf.alsoलशेन प्रयत्नशैथिल्यन
ब्यञ्जनानां वचनमुच्चारणं क्रियत Uvvata on
R.Pr. XIV.5.
लैङ्ग a grammatical operation or a
rule of grammar concerning
gender; cf. यदि तींह्य कृत्स्नः पदार्थेभिधीयत
लैङ्गाः सांख्याश्च विधये न सिध्यन्ति M.Bh.on
P.II.2.24 Vart. 8, 9.
लेीक a term used in the Mah∂-
bhasya in contrast with the term
वेद, signifying common people
speaking the language correctly;
the term लेीक is also used in contrast
with the term शास्त्र or its techni-
que; cf. यथा लोके or लीकतः M. Bh.
on P.VII. 1. 9, I.1.44 Vart. 3:
also cf. न यथा लोके तथा ब्याकरोणे M.
Bh. on P.I.1.1 Wºrt, 7.
लोकविज्ञान use or understanding of a
word current among the people;
cf. अन्तरेणैव बचनं लोकाघज्ञानात्सिद्धमेतत् M.
Bh. on P. I.1.2I Vart. 5.
लोकाश्रयत्व dependence upon the peo-
ple for the use.The phrase लेकाश्रयत्वा-
छिङ्गस्य, referring to the fixation of
gender depending entirely on the
people's usage, is very common in
the Mahabhasya; cf. M.Bh. on P.
II.1.36, II.2.29, etc.
लोट् a term for the affixes of the impe-
rative mood or आज्ञाथै, applied to
roots in the same sense in which
the fluh' affixes are applied; cf.विधि-
निमन्त्रणामन्त्रणाधीष्टसंप्रश्नप्रार्थनेषु लिङ्क ' लेट् च
P. III.3.161, 162. These affixes,
specifically the affixes of the second
person singular and plural,are also
applied in the sense offrequency or
collection,to a root when that root
is repeated to show that frequency;
e.g. लुनीहि लुनीहि इति डनाति;भ्रामट
मठमट खेदूरमट इति अटति; cf. Ks on
P. III. 4. 2,3.
लीप disappearance of a word or part
of a word enjoined in grammar for
arriving at the required forms of
a word: cf अदर्दन लेपः P. I.1.52: cf.
अदईीनमश्रवणमनुच्चारणमनुपलब्धिरभावे वर्णवि-
नाइा इत्थनर्थान्तरम् ) एतेः इादैर्योर्थोभिधीयत
तस्य लेोप इतीयं संज्ञा भवति Kas.on P.I.l.
52. This disappearance in the
case of an affix is tantamount to
its notional presence or imaginary
presence, as operations caused by
it do take place although the word
elemment has disappeared; cf.
प्रत्ययलेपे प्रत्ययलक्षणम् | प्रत्यये लुप्तेपि तद्धेतुकं
क्रार्य भघात Kas. on P. I.1.62.
लीपबळीयस्त्व the superior strength or
superiority of elision as a gramma-
tical operation in contrast with
other operations,by virtue of which
the elision, which is prescrib-
ed, takes place first and then

ळीमइय
312
वं
other operations get a scope for
their application; cf. सर्वविधिभ्येी
. लेोपविधिवेलीयान् Par.Sek. Pari. 93.
लोमद्य the utterance of an aspirate
letter rather harshly, with a stress
on it, when that utterance is look-
ed upon as a fault; cf. ऊष्मणां घोषाण्ां
' लेीमयमसौकुमार्य क्षेत्रेडनम् अधिको वर्णस्य ध्वनिः
Uvvata on R. Pr. KIV.6.
लोमादि a class of words headed by
the word लेीमन् to which the tad.
affix, दा, in the sense *possessed of '
is added optionally along with the
usual affix मत् ( मतुप् O: e.g. ऋ:,
लोमवान्, रेमदा: रेग्मवान् बधुदा:, इरि्:,
कपिशा: etc. cf. Kव्रS. on P. V.2.100.
लोहितादि(1)a class of words headed by
लेोहित to which the affix क्यब् ( य ) is
added in the sense of *becoming',
to form a denominative root-base
which gets the verb-endings ofboth
: the padas; e. g. लेीहृितायति, लीह्यितायत:
निद्रायति, निद्रायते; the class लेहितादि is
considered as अाकृतिगण so that simi-
lar denominative verb-bases could
be explained cf. K8. on P.III.1.
13; (2) a class of words headed
by लेहित, to which the fem. affix
ष्फ ( अायनी ) is added after they
have got the taddhita afix यञ्
added to them in the sense of a !
. grandchild': e. g. लौहित्यायनी, कात्या-
यनी etc.; cf Kas. on P. IV. 1.18.
लोकैक Prevalent in common utter- |
ance.of the people as contrasted |
withवैदिक;cf.यथा लैकिकवैर्दिक्षु कृतान्तेषु |
M.Bh.on Ahnika 1.See लोक्रabove |
ल्यप् krt affix य substituted for the |
gerund termination क्त्वा when the
root,to which त्वा has been applied,
is preceded by a prefix with which
it (the root with the affix) is conn-
compounded; cf. समासेSनन्यूर्वे क्त्वं
ल्यप् P. VII. 1. 87.
ल्य् krt affix यु changed into अन in _
the sense ofan agent applied to the
root नन्द् and others (after which it
is seen actually used in language):
e.g. नन्दनः, दूषण:, साधन:, रोचन: cf.
नन्दिग्राह्यपचादिभ्ये ल्युणिन्यव: P.III.1.134.
ल्युट् kpt affix अन in the sense ofverbal
activity as also in the sense of an
*abode or *an instrument': cf. P.
III.3.113,115, 116, 1 17.
ल्वदि a class of roots, headed by the
root , the past. pass.part. affix त
placed after which becomes
changed into न: e.g- न:, ल्नवान्:
जीन:, जीनवान:, etc. cf. Kas.onP.VII.
2.44.
व
व् (l) fourth letter of the class of
consonants headed by य्, which
are looked upon as semi-vowels;
व् is a dental, soft, non-aspirate
consonant pronounced as @ in
some provinces and written also
sometimes like ब्, especially when
it stands at the beginning of a
word; (2) substitute for उ which
is followed by a vowel excepting
उ: e. g, मधु+अरि: = मध्वरि:: cf. इको
यणचि P. VI. I. 77; (3) the con-
sonant व्, which is sometimes
uttered with very little effort when
it is at the end of a word and
followed by a vowel or a semi-
vowel, or a fifth, fourth or third
consonant or the consonant .
In such cases it is called लधून्वारणः
cf. यस्योच्चारणे जिह्वाग्रोपाग्रमध्यमूलानां वैथिल्यं
जायते स लब्ध्वारण: S. K. on P.VIII.3.
18;(4) solitary remmant of the affi-
xes किप्,क्रिन्, ण्वि and the like, when
the other letters which are mute
are dropped and the affix कप् or
the like becomes a zero affix. This
व् also is finally dropped cf
वरपृक्तस्य P. VI.1.67.
| व (l) the semivowel ब्: see व्; (2)

र्वज्ञादि
313 वात
personal-ending substituted for बसु
in the perfect ( लिट् ) first person
(उत्तमपुरुष), and in the present tense
in the case of the root विद्:
cf. परस्मैपदानां णलतुसुस्o and विदे， लटे
वा. P. III. 4.82,83; (3) krt affix
कप् , किन् or वि of which only व्
remains; cf. आनगन्तोञ्चतेौ वप्रत्यय P.
VI. 2.52; cf. also धिष्वग्देवयोश्च टेरद्यञ्चतौ
वप्रत्यये VI.3.92.the affix is mention-
ed as वप्रत्यय by Panini, but, in fact,
it is व् , अ being added for ease in
pronunciation: (4) tad. affix in the
sense of possession added along
with the other affixes इन् , इक, and
बत् to the word केढा and to some
other words such as मण, हृिरण्य, राजी,
अर्णस् etc. as also to गाण्ड and अजग;
cf. P. V. 2. 109, 110.
वइादि a class of words headed by
the word वंळा, the word भर placed
after which gets the taddhita
affixes added to it, as prescribed
in the senses * takes it', * carries it ?
or * produces it ': e.g. वांझभारिकः: cf.
Kas. on P.V. 1.50. The tad. affix-
es as prescribed in the senses
mentioned above are added to the
words वंश etc. and not to भार्
according to some commentators;
e.g.वांशिकः, क्रौटाजक: etc.: cf Kas. on
P. V. 1.50.
व¶ the consonant व् with the vowel
अ and कार being added for facility
of utterance; cf. T. Pr. I. 17, 21,
also वर्णात्कारः P. III.3.108, Vart. 3.
व्र्तव्य that which ought to be stated -
or prescribed; the word is fre-
guently found used by the Vartti-
kakara when he suggests any
addition to, or modification in
Panini's rules. Sometimes,the word
is added by the author of the
Mahabhasya in the explanation ofa
Varttika after stating what is lack-
ing in the Warttika.
40 ]
वक्त्र mouth, or orifice of the mouth
which, in general is the place of
utterance for all letters, but espe-
cially for the vowel अ; cf. सेर्व-
मुखस्थानमवर्णस्य केचिदिच्छन्ति I
a grammarian who wrote a
grammatical work on verbs named
अाख्यातप्रकरण.
वचन (1) lit. statement; an authorita-
tive statement made by the authors
of the Sutras and the Warttikas as
also of the Mahabhsya; cf. अस्ति
ह्यन्यदतस्य वन्वंन प्रयेीजनम् M. Bh. on
Siva Sutra 1 Vart. 1 The word is
also used predicatively in the sense
of वक्तव्यम् by the Varttikakara; cf.
लति ल वावचनम् , ऋति ऋ वावचनम् ; (2)
number, such as एकवचन, द्विवचन,
बहुवचन etc.; cf. वचनमेकत्वद्वित्वबहुत्वानि
Ks.on P.I.2.51 ; cf लुपि युक्तवद् ब्यक्ति-
वचने | लुक्रि अभिधेयवल्लिङ्गवचनानि भवन्ति !
लवणः सूपः , लवणा यवागृ: M.Bh.on P.I.
2.57: ' (3) expressive word: cf.
गुणवचनब्राह्मणादिभ्यः कर्मणि च P. V.1.124
where the Kasik explains the
word गुणवचन as गुणमुक्तवन्ते गुणवचना:;
cf. also the terms गुणवन्वन, जातिवत्वन,
क्रियावचन etc. as classes of words;
cf also अभिज्ञाबचन तृट् P.III.2.112;
(4) that which is uttered: cf. मुखना-
सिकाबचनेीनुनासिक:	मुखसहिता नासिका
मुखनासिका ， तया य उच्चार्यते असौ वर्ण: Kas.
on P. I.1.8.
चञ्जाछति the form of वव्र or thun-
derbolt, in which ( form ) the
Jihvmणेliya ( letter ) is .. shown
in writing: cf. वञ्जावृतिर्जिह्वामूलीयः Kat.
I.1.17. See जिह्वामूलीय.
वत् substitute for मत् of मतुप्. See मतुप्.
घात (1) tad. affix वत् in the sense of
similar activity or thing: e. g.
राजवद्वर्तते, मधुरावत् कुने प्राकार:: cf. तेन
तुल्ये क्रियां विद्वतः | तत्र तस्येव P.V.1.1 I5,
116; (2) tad. affix वत् in the sense
of deserving;e.g, राजवत् पालनम् ; cf.
तदर्हम् P.V.1.117; (3) tad. affix वत्

वातनिदंज्ञा
314
वर्च
applied to prefixes inVedic Litera-|
ture without any sense of its own ;
e.g यदुद्धते निवतो यांति बप्सत् ; cf. उपसर्गा-
च्छन्दसि धात्वर्थे P.V. 1. 118.
वातनिदंशा specific statement by putt-
ing the word वत् for the sake of
extended application ( अतिद ) ;
e.g. ब्राह्मणबदधीतं: cf. स तर्हि वतिनिदेशा:
कर्तव्यः | न ह्यन्तरेण वतिमातदेशे गम्यते ?
| M.Bh.on P. I.1.23 Vart. 4.
वर्ती the posssssive affix वत् ( मतुप् )
with fem. ई added; cf. विश्वदेव्यसेमी
बत्याम् ( दीर्धमापद्यते ) V.Pr.III.117.
वतु or वतुप् tad. affix वत् applied to
the pronouns यत्, तद्, एतद् , क्रिम् and
इदम् in the sense of measurement;
e.g, यावान् , तावान् , एतावान् , कियान् |
इयान् , क्रवान् ;cf. यत्तदेतेभ्यः परिमाणे वतुप् ,
किमिदंभ्यां वो घ: P. V. 2.39,40.Words
ending with this affix वतु are
designated संख्या: cf. बहुगणवतुडति
संख्या P.I.1.23.
वनमालिन् a grammarian of the
seventeenth century who wrote a
commentary named मतीन्मजा on
Kondabhargas Waiyakarana-
bhisama and a grammar work
named सिद्धान्ततत्वविवेक.
वनस्पत्यादि a classof compound words
headed by वनस्पति which retain the
original accent of the members of|
the compound, as for example, in !
the compound word वनस्पति both
the words वन and पति have got
their initial vowel अ accented
acute; cf Kas.on P.VI.2.140.
वनिप् krt affix बन् applied in the
sense of agent in Wedic literature
to a root ending in अा and in
spoken language to any root where
' forms are seen;e.g.भूरिदात्रा, विजावा;cf.
अातेो मनिन्कनब्वानेपश्र । अन्येभ्योपि दृश्यत P.
III. 2. 74, 75.
वय tad. affix वय applied to the word
दु in the sense of मान (a peculiar
product): e.g- दुवयम्; cf. माने वय:
P. IV. 3.162.
वग् or वरच् krt affix वर applied to the
roots स्था, ईदृ,भास्, पिस् and कस्,as also
to the intensive base ofया in the
sense of a habituated agent; e. g.
स्थावर, ईश्वर, यायावर etc. cf. स्थळाभासं-
पिसकसो वरच् ) यश्च यड: P. III. 2. 175,
176.
वरणादि a class of words headed by
वरण which have the taddhita affix
elided, if it is added to them in
the four senses mentioned in
P.IV.2.67-70 cf. वरणानामदूरभवं नगरं
वरणाः | कटुकबदर्या अदूरभवो ग्रामः कंदुकबदरी !
cf. Kas. on P.IV.2.82.
वरदराज a scholar of grammar and a
pupil of Bhattoj Diksita who fio-
urished in the end of the seven-
teenth century and wrote abridg-
ments of the Siddhinta-kaumudi
for beginners in grammar named
लघुसिद्धान्तकौमुदी and मध्यसिद्धान्तकौमुदी as
also धातुकारिकावली and गीर्वीणपदमञ्जरी.
The work under the name सार-
सिद्धान्तकौमुदी, which is the shortest
abridgment, is, in fact, the लबु-
सिद्धान्तकौमुदी itself. It is possible that
the auother first preparcd the सार-
सिद्धान्तकौमुदी and then, he himself
or a pupil of his, put additional
nccessary matter and prepared the
Laghusiddhinta-kaumudi.
वररुचि (1) a reputed ancient gra-
mmarian who is identified with
Katyayana, the prominent author
of the Varttikas on the Stras of
Panini. Both the names वररुचैि and
कात्यायन are mentioned in commen-
tary works in connection with the
Warttikas on the Sutras of Panini,
and it is very likely that Vararuci
was the individual name of the
scholar, and Katyayana his family
name. The words क्राल्य and कात्यायन
are found used in Slokavarttikas in
the Mahibhagya on P.III.2.3 and
III.2.118 where references made
are actually found in the prose

वरस्राव
Varttikas (see कविधेो सर्वत्र प्रसाराणेभ्यो
ड: P.III. 2. 3 Vart ' and स्मपुरा
भूतमात्रे न रुमपुराद्यतने P.III.2.118 Vart.
1)indicating that the Slokavarttika-
kira believed that the Varttikas
were composed by Katyayana.
There is no reference at all in the
Mahabhasya to Wararuci as a
writer of the Varttikas; there is
only one reference which shows
that there was a scholar by name
Vararuci known to Patanjali, but
he was a poet; cf. वाररुवं काव्यंin the
sense of composed' ( कृत and
not प्रोक्त ) by बररुचि M. Bh. on
P. [V. 2.4. ( 2 ) बररुाच is also
mentioned as the author of the
Prakrta Grammar known by the
name प्राकृतप्रकाशा or प्राकृतमञ्जरी, This
बररुचि, who also was कात्यायन by
Gotra name, was a grammarian
later than Patafijali, who has
been associated with Sarvvarman,
(the author of the first three Adh-
yayas of the Katantra Stºtras), as
the author of the fourth Adhyaya.
Patafijali does not associate वररुाव
with Kityayana at alI. His men-
tion of वररुचि asa writer of a Kavya
is a sufficient testimony for that.
Hence, it appears probable that
atyayana, to whom thc author-
ship of the Vijasaneyi Pratisakhya
and many other works allied with
Veda has been attributed, was not
associated with Vararuci by Pataf- !
jali, and it is only the later writers
who identified the grammarian
Vararuci,who composed the fourth
Adhyaya of the Katantra Grammar i
and wrote a Prakrit Grammar and }
' works, }
some other grammar
with the ancient revered Katya-
yana, the author of Varttikas, the
Vijasaneyi Pratisakhya and the
Puspasutra; (3) There was a com-
paratively modern grammarian
315
वणे
named वररुचि who wrote a small
treatise on genders of words con-
sisting of about 125 stan2as with a
commentary named Lingavrtti,
possibly written by the author
himself. (4) There was also ano-
ther modern grammarian by
name वररुचि who wrote a work on
syntax named श्रयेतांगमुखमण्डन discuss-
＾ ing the four topics कारक, समास, तद्धित
and कृदन्त.
वरवर्णिनी name of a commentary on
the Paribhsendusekhara written
by Guruprasada Sastri, a reputed
grammarian of the present cenutry.
चराहृादि a class of words headed by
वराहृ which have the taddhita affix
क ( कक् ) added to them in the
four senses mentioned in P. IV.
2.67-70 e.g. वाराह्यकम्, पालाशाक्रम् etc.;
cf. Kas. on P. IW. 2.80.
वरी feminine form of the affix वनिप्;
e. g. ऋतावरी, शार्वरी; etc.; cf. वनी र थ
P. IV. 1.7.
वर्ग name given to the different
classes of consonants which are
headed by an unaspirate surd;
e. g. कवर्ग, चवर्ग, टवर्ग, तवेर्ग and पवर्ग.
The several consonants in each
group or class, are, in their serial
ordef, named वगेप्रथम, वर्गद्वितीय etc.
On the analogy of these five
classes, the semivowels are called
by the name यवर्ग and sibilants, are
called by the name >ावग,
चग्यदि a class of words headed by
the word वाये which have their
initial vowel accented acute when
they stand as second members o
a tatpurusa compound other
than the karmadharaya type of it;
e. g. वासुदेववग्र्य:, अर्जुनपक्ष्यः; cf Ka:
on P, VI. 2,131. '
वर्ण phonemic unit: a letter jhe
term was in use iri ancient time
|	and found used generally in*the

चणेग्रहण 316
वर्णसमाम्नाय
masculine gender, but occasionally
in the neuter gender too; .e- g.
उपादष्टा इमे वर्णाः M. Bh. Ahnika 1.
M. Bh. on Siva Stºtra 5; cf. कृतेस्तईः
कस: सिकताः ， हिंसे: सिंहृ: 1 बर्णव्यत्यये न-
व्यत्यय: | M. Bh. on. Siva stitra 5.
also मा कदाचिदवणे भूत् M.Bh, on Siva वर्णसमाम्नाय a collection of letters or
Stras 3, 4.
बर्णग्रहण mention of a grammatical
operation concerning a single
letter or caused by a single letter;
cf. न वर्णग्रहणेषु (एषा अर्थवत्परिभाषा प्रवर्तते).
Sradeva Pari 10.
वणैपाठ serial mention or enumera-
tion of letters in the fourteen Siva
Sutras. The word is also used in
the sense of the alphabet given in
the Pratisakhya and grammar
works; cf. एवं तर्हि वर्णपाठ एव उपदेशा:
करिष्यते M. Bh. on P. I. 1.69.
मकारा a minor work upon letters
and their nature by a grammarian
named Ghanasyma.
वर्णरा，ि the collection of letters as
mentioned in works on grammar
and Pratisakhyas; cf. इति वर्णराज्ञिः
क्रमश्च R. Pr. I. 10.
वर्णविकार change of one letter into
another ( in the formation of a
word ) the discussion of which is
looked upon as one of the features
of grammar; cf. लेीपागमवर्णविकारज्ञो हृि
सम्यग्वेदान्परिपालयिष्यति.M.Bh. Ahnika 1.
वर्णविचाल disappearance of a letter:
cf वर्णाश्रयः प्रत्येये वर्णविचालस्यानिमित्तम् ;
दक्षि: I M. Bh. on. P. I. 1. 39 Vart.
10.
वणे|ावध an injunction or operation
conditioned by a single letter:
लदशे वर्णविधेर्भवत्यन्तरङ्गतः M. Bh. on
P. 1.4.2.
वर्णविपर्यय changing the place of
letters; cf. सिंहे वर्णविपर्ययात् Vart 20.
वणेविवकचन्द्रिका a minor grammar
work on the nature of letters by a
grammarian named काइीिनाथ.
& ____
बण्धत्यय transposition of letters: cf.
' वर्णव्यत्यये चार्थान्तरगमनात् ( अर्थवन्तौ वर्णाः):
alphabet given traditionally. Alt-
hough the Sanskrit alphabethas got
everywhere the same cardinal let-
ters i.e. vowels अ, इ etc., consonants
कु, इ etc : semivowels य्, र्, लु, व,
sibilants ¶ ष् स् द् and a few addi-
tional phonetic units such as अनुस्वार,
विसर्ग and others, still their numbef
and order differ in the different
traditional enumerations. Panini
has not mentioned them actually
but the fourteen Siva Stras, on
which he has based his work,
mention only 9 vowels and 34
consonants, the long vowels being
looked upon as varieties of the
short ones. The Siks of Panini
mentions 63 or 64 letters, adding
the letter ळ ( दुःस्पृश्ट ); cf. त्रिषचि:
चतुःषष्टिर्वा वर्णाः शम्भुमते मताः Panini
Siksa. St.3. The Rk Prtisakhya adds
four ( Visarga, Jihvamiliya, Up-
adhmaniya and Anuswara ) to the
forty three given in the Siva Sutras
and mentions 47. The Taittiriya
Pratisakhya mentions 52 letters
wiz. 16 vowels, 25class consonants,
4 semivowels,six sibilants (द्, व् , स्,
हृ , < क्, < पू , ) and anusvara. The
Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya mentions
65 letters 3 varieties of अ, इ, उ, ऋ
and ल, two varieties of ए, ए, ओ,
औौ, 25 class-consonants, four semi-
vowels, four sibilants, and
जिह्वामूलीय, उपध्मानीय, अनुस्वार,
विसर्जनीय, नासिक्य and four यम letters;
cf. एत पञ्चषष्टिवर्णा ब्रह्मराह्निारात्मवान्वःV. Pr.
VIII. 25. The Rk Tantra gives 57
letters wiz. 14 vowels, 25 class
consonants, 4 semivowels, 4 sibi-
lants, Visarga,.Uihvamjiya, Up-
adhmanya, Aaunasika, 4_yarmas
and two Anuswaras. The Rk

धर्णोनर्थवत्त्व
317
चतंन्
Tantra gives two different serial
orders, the Uddesa (common) and
the Upadesa (traditional). The
common order or UddeSa gives
the 14 vowels beginning with अ,
then the 25 class consonants, then
the four semivowels, the four
sibilants and lastly the eight
ayogavahas, viz. the visarjanya
and others. The traditional order
gives the diphthongs first, then
long vowels ( अा, ऋ, ल्, ई and ऊ )
then short vowels (क्र, ल, इ, उ, and
lastly अ ), then semivowels, then
the five fifth consonants, the five
fourths, the five thirds, the five
seconds, the five firsts, then the
four sibilants and then the eight
ayogavaha letters and two Aus-
varas instead of one anuswara.
Panini appears to have followed
the traditional order with a few
changes that are necessary for the
technigue of his work.
e _
वर्णीनथेवत्व the wiew that letfers do
not possess the sense, as individua-
lly in every letter no separate sense ;
is seen: cf. अनर्थकास्तुetc. M. Bh. on
Siva Stºtra 5, Vart.14 and 15.
वर्णार्थवत्त्व the theory or view that indi-
vidual letters are severally possess-
ed of different scnses. For instance,
the difference in the meanings of
the words कूप, यूप, and सृप is due to
the difference in their initial letter.
The theory is not acceptable to the
Vaiyakaranas nor the theory वणानर्थ-
वत्व given above. They follow the
theory of संघातार्थवत्त्व i. e. sense given
by a group of words together. See
M.Bh, onSiva Sutra 5, Varttikas
9 to 15. _
a grammatical operation
depending upon a single letter i.e.
an operation caused by a letter
singly; cf, वर्णाश्रये नास्ति प्रत्ययलक्षणम् |
ParSek.Pari.21; cf.also वर्णाश्रयः प्रत्यये
वर्णविचालस्यानिमित्तम् 1 दाक्षि:l M.Bh.onP.
I.1.39 Vart.10.
वर्णिकुबेरनाथ or वर्णिकुवेरानन्द anold writer
on grammar who has written a
work named इाब्दावेवरण on the mean-
ings of words. The work forms a
part of his bigger work दानभागबत.
Both the works are incomplete.
The ढाब्दविवरण is based mostly upon
ancient grammar works ofPatafijali
Vararuci, Varttikakra, Sarvavar-
man, Bhartphari and others.
वणैकदेइा a part or a portion of a com-
bined letter i.e.संयुक्तस्वरor संयुक्तव्यञ्जन.
The diphthongs or संयुक्तस्वरs are
divisible into two Swaras, for inst-
ance ( into अा and ए, औौ into अा
and ओी. Similarly double conso-
nants like क्कू, च्वं, क्म्, क्त् etc. are
also divisible. Regarding the point
raised whether the individual parts
can be looked upon as separate lett-
ers for undergoing or causing a gra-
mmatical operation,the decision of
the grammarians is that they can-
not be looked upon as separate,
when they are completely mixed
as the dipthongscfनाक्यपवृक्तस्यावयवस्य
ताद्वधियेथा द्रव्येषु M. Bh. on Siva Stºtra
3, 4 Vart. 6.
वते a term used by ancient gramma-
rians and later on by commenta-
tors for compound words cf. वर्तनं
वर्तः समास: Nyasa on K. II.4.15.
वर्तमान the present tense: cf वर्तमाने
लट् P.III.2.123; cf.also क्तस्य च वर्तमाने
PII 3.67;also वर्तमानसामीप्ये वर्तमानवद्वा
P. III. 3.131. _
वर्तमाना a term used by ancient
grammarians for the present tense,
along with the term वर्तमान also;
cf. यदा हि बुद्धिकर्म तदा वर्तमाना भाबष्यति,
M.Bh. on P. III.3.133 Vart.8.
वार्तन् from वर्त which means a com-
pound;see वर्त, (l) The term वर्तिन्or

वत्स्र्य
318 व-ंगम
वर्तिपद is used in the sense of a mem-
ber of a compound;cfवतेस्यास्तीति वर्ति
समासावयवभूतम् Nysa on P. II. 4.1 5.
(2) The term बर्तिन् is also used for
a syllable ( अक्षरम् ); cf. वर्ति R.T.47,
explained by the commentator as
' अक्रूरादिषु वर्ततं ब्यञ्जने वर्ति चाप्यक्षरं भवति |
cf. als6 गुर्वक्षराणां गुरुवृत्ति सर्वे R. Pr.
XVIII.32.
वत्स्यै lit. gingival, or produced at the
gums; the letter ， according to
some scholars who believe that र्
is produced at the root of the
teeth i.e. at the gums; cf. एके
अान्वार्या रेफ बत्रुर्यमिच्छन्ति वसै भवो वत्स्र्य: !
वत्से्ाब्देन दत्तमूलादुपरिष्टादुच्दूनः श्रददा:
(gums) उच्यते Uvvata on R.Pr.I.20.
वत्सयेत् future, belonging to future;cf.
बत्स्येत्प्रवृत्त्या इहु कार्याणि क्रियन्त Paribhasa
87 given by Stradeva.
वर्धमान (1) a long vowel;(2)name ofa
famous ]ain grammarian, disciple
of Govindastiri, who lived in the
beginning of the twelfth century
A.D.and wrote a metrical work on
ganas or groups ofwords in gra-
mmar, named गणरत्नमहोदवि, and also
a commentary on it. The work
consists of8 chapters and has got
some commentaries besides the
well-known one by the author
himself He also wrote two other
works on grammar कातन्त्रविस्तर and |
क्रियागुतक as also a few religious
books.
वर्षे name of an ancient scholar of
grammar and Mfmarhs, cited by
some as the preceptor of कात्यायन and
Panini. If not of Panini, he may
" have been a preceptor of Katya-
yana
वस्व्र्य or वस्र्य gingival, produced at
the gums; the word वस्र्व is proba-
' bly the correct word meaning the
' root of the teeth or gums; the
word बसै was also used in the same
sense as बस्र्व from which the word
वरुर्य could be derived. बरूर्य and बस्र्य
are only the variant pronnnciati-
ons of वरूये and वरर्य.The word वत्स्र्य,
with त् inserted between & and
स् , is given above as explained by
Uvvata from वत्सं. It is very likely
that वत्सै is wrongly written for
वरुर्वor वसे.
वट् short term (प्रत्याहृार) for consonants
टेxcepting य्: cf. लेीपो ब्येवैलि P. VI.
1.66; आर्धधातुकस्येड् वलादः P. VUI.2.35.
वल (l) tad. caturarthika affix वलच्
applied to the word शिखा in the
four senses country and others;e.g.
द्विाखावलं नगरं दशे वा Kas.on P.IV.2.89;
(2) tad. affix वल in the sense of
possession applied to words रजस्,
कृषि and others as also to दन्त and
झिखा when the word is used as a
proper noun ( संज्ञा ) and to the
word ऊर्जस्: e.g. रजस्वला, कृषीवल:,
ऊर्जखल: etc.; cl. रजःकृष्यासुतिपरिषदे वलब्,
दन्तइिखात्संज्ञायाम् and ज्योत्स्ना ... ऊर्जस्वल
..मलीमसा: P. V. 2.112, 113, 114.
बळम named हृरिवछभ also,who wrote a
commentary on NageSa's Sabd-
endusekhara.
वश short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for conso.
nants from व in ह्ययवरट् to the mute
द्， in जबगडदद्ळ i.e. all semi-vowels
excepting य् , and the fifth, the
fourth and the third class conso-
nants; cf. नड् वशि कृति cf.P.VII.2.8.
व्ोगम name given in the Pratisºkhya
works to letter-combinations where
a consonant gets a change suitable
to the neighbouring consonants as
given in the Rk.Pratisakhya in IV.1
to IV.5 including जन्त्व, अनुनासिक्रदशा,
छस्व, परसवणे, अनुस्वार and others, as
given in P. VIII.2.39, VIII.3.7,
VIII. 8.23, VIII.4.40, 46, 58,59,
62, 63; cf. न ह्यत्र अवशंगमसंधाविव अपरि-
णतानि ब्यञ्जनानि संयेगं गच्छन्तिUvvagaon
R.Pr.IV.5.

वस्!
_
319
_
वाक्यपदीय
वस्र् (l) pres participle affix वसु subs-
tituted for दातृ applied to the root
विद्: e.g. विद्वस्, cf. धिंद: दातुर्वसुः P.VII.
l.36; (2) perf part, affix क्रसु subs-
tituted for the general affix लिट्
mostly in Vedic Literature, but in
specific cases in spoken language;
e. g. see सदिवस्, बुधुवसु, उपेयिवस् cf.
P III.2. 107-9. See कसु.
वसन्तादि a class of words headed by
the word वसन्त, which are mostly
names of seasons, to which the
affix इक ( ठक्) is added in the sense
of that which one studies or
knows'; cf. वसन्तसहृवारीतीयं ग्रन्थी
वसन्तस्तमधीते वासान्तक्र: 1 वार्षिक: Ks. on
P. IV. 2.63.
वर्ठ the krt. affix कसु which see above.
The word वसु is used for कसु by
the Varttikakara: cf. वसुसंप्रसारणमाज्वधी
सिद्धे वक्तव्यम् P.VI.4.22 Vart. 9.
tmanepada personal-ending
of the first person ( उत्तमपुरुष) dual,
substituted for the general ल् affix;
cf. तितस्क्ष ... महिङ्क P.III.4.78.
a term often used in the
Sitras of Panini and others,' to
show the optional application of
a rule: cf. न वेति विभाषा P.I.2.44: cf.
also वा गम:I. 2.13 etc. See विभाषा.
[WACKERNAGELL], a
German Professor and scholar of
Sanskrit Grammar who collaborat-
ed in the work of editing *Altindi-
sch Grammatik'.
वाकिनादि a class of words headed by
the word वाकिन tb which the tadd-
" hita affix अायान ( फिञ् ) is added in
the sense of an *offspring' when
along with the tad. affix अायनि,the
augment क् ( कुक् ) is added to the
base ( बाफिन or the like ); e. g.
बाढिनक्रायनि:; cf.Kas. on P.IV.1.158.
वाक्य a sentence giving an idea in a
single unit of expression consisting
of the verb with its krakas or
घा
_
instruments and adverbs; cf.अाख्यातं
साब्ययं सकारकं सकारकविशेषणं वाक्यसंज्ञे
भवतीति वक्तव्यम् | साब्ययम् | उचैः पठति |
सकारकम् | ओदनं पचति | M. Bh. on
P. II. 1.1. Vart. 10. Regarding
the different theoretical ways of
the interpretation of a ' sentence
see the word इाब्दबोध. For details,
see वाक्यपदीय II. 2 where the diffe-
rent definitions of वाक्य are given
and the अखण्डवाक्यस्फोट is established
as the sense of a sentence.
वाक्यकाण्ड name given to the second
chapter of Bhartrharis Vakya-
padiya un which problems regard-
ing the interpretation of a senten-
ce are fully discussed.
वाक्यकार a term used for a writer
who composes a work in pithy,
brief assertions in the manner of
Stras, such as the Warttikas. The
term is found used in Bhartrhari's
Mahabhasyadipika where by con-
trast with the term Bhsyakara it
possibly refers to the Warttikakra
Katyayana; cf. एषा भाष्यकारस्य कल्पना
न वाक्यकार्य Bhartrhari Maha-
bhasyadipika. cf. also Ngesas
statement वाक्यकारो वार्तिक्रमारभते: cf.
also बुडम्पादये वाक्यकारीयाः Madhavy
Dhatuvrtti.
वाक्यपदी name of a work on the de-
notation of words in verse-form
with a comentary of his own writ-
ten by a grammarian named
गङ्गादास. The name वाक्यपदी is con-
founded with वाक्यपदीय of Bha-
rtrhari through mistake.
वाक्यपदीय a celebrated work on
meanings of words and sentences
written by the famous grammarian
Bhartrhari ( called also Hari ) of
the seventh century. The work is
looked upon as a | final authority
regarding the grammatical treat-
ment of words and sentences,for
**
-

वाक्यपदीयटीका
320 वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष
their interpretation and often
guoted by later grammarians. It
consists of three chapters the
Padakanda or Brahmakhda,
the Vakyakanda and the Sarh-
kirnakanda, and has got an ex-
cellent commentary written by
Punyarja and Helirja.
वाक्यपदीयटीका name of a commen-
tary on Bhartphari's Vakyapadiya
written by Punyaraja on the first
and the second Kanda. Some
scholars hold the view that the
commentary on the first knda
was written by Bhartphari himself.
वाक्यपदीयप्रकीणेप्रकाइा name given to
the commentary on the third
Kanda or book of Bhartrhari's
Vakyapadya by Helrja.
वाक्यपासमाते completion of the idea
to be expressed in a sentence or in
a group of sentences by the word-
ing actually given, leaving
nothing to be understood as con-
trasted with वाक्यापरिसमाप्ते used in
the Mahabhasya: cf. वाक्यापरिसमाप्तेर्वा
P.I.1.10 Wart. 4 and the Mah-
bhasya thereon. There are two
ways in which such a completion
takes place,singly and collectively;
cf प्रत्येकं वाक्यपरिसमाति: illustrated by
the usual example दवदत्तयज्ञदत्तविष्णु-
मित्रा भोज्यन्ताम् where Patanjali re-
marks प्रत्थकं ( प्रत्यवयवं) भुजिः परिसमाप्यत:
cf also समुदाये वाक्यपरिसमाप्तिः where
Patajali remarks गर्ग: इातं दण्ड्यन्ताम् |
अर्थिनश्च राजानो हिरण्येन भवन्ति न च प्रत्येकं
दण्डयन्ति | M. Bh.on P.I.1.1Vart.12:
* cf also M.Bh. on P.I.1.7, I.2.39,
II.2.l etc.
वाक्यप्रकाशा a work on the interpreta-
tion of sentences written with a
commentary upon it by उदयधर्ममुनि
of North Gujarat who lived in the
seventeenth century A.D.
वाक्यमदीप a term sometimes seen
(wrongly) applied to the Vakya-
padya of Bhartrhari. It may have
been the name of the commentary
on the Wakyaprakasa.
वाक्यभेद् a serious fault of expression
when a sentence is required to be
divided into two sentences for the
sake of its proper interpretation:
cf केचिद्वा सुप्यापिशलेरित्यनुवर्तयन्ति तद्वाक्य
भदेन सुब्धातौ विकल्पं करोतिKS. onP.VI.
1.94: cf also तद्धि ( स्थानग्रहृणं ) तृतीयया
विपरिणमय्य वाक्यभेदेन स्थानिन: प्रसङ्ग जायमानः
etc. Par. Sek. on Pari. 13.
वाक्यशेष complement of a sentence:
something reguired to be under-
stood to complete the sense of a
Sentence generally according to
the context cf.कल्प्यो हि वाक्यशेषो वाक्यं
वक्तर्यघनं हि t M.Bh. on P. I. 1.57
Vart. 6, cf. कामन्वारश्च वतिनिर्देशे वाक्यशेषं
समथेयितुंम् | तद्यथा " उद्दीनरवन्मदेषु गावः !
सन्ति न सन्तीति i मातृवदस्याः कलाः ! सन्तिं
न सन्तीति ! M.Bh. on P.I.3.62.
वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष the grammarian's
theory that as the individual words
have practically no existence as
far as the interpretation or the
expression of sense is concerned,
the sentence alone being capable of
conveying the sense, the formation
of individual words in a sentence'
is explained by putting them in a
Sentence and knowing their mutual
relationship. The word गाम् cannot
be explained singly by showing the
base गे and the case ending अम्
unless it is seen in the sentence गाम्
अानय: cf. यथा वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष कृष्णाद-
संबुद्धयन्त उपपद ऋध: क्तिनि कृत कृष्ण ऋध्
ति इति स्थित असिद्धत्वात्पूर्वमाद्गुणे कृत अचो
रहृाभ्यामिति द्वित्वं .. Pari. Bhaskara Pari.
99- The view is put in alternation
with the other view, viz. the
पदसंस्कारपक्ष which has to be accept-
ed in connection with the गौणमुख्य-
न्याय; cf पदयैव गौणार्थकत्वस्य ग्रहेण अस्य

वाक्यार्थे 321
( गौणमुख्यन्यायस्य) पदकार्यविषयत्वमवेीन्वितम् |
अन्यथा वाक्यसंस्कारपक्ष तषु तदनापात: Par.
Sek. on Pari. 15, The gramma-
rians usually follow the वाक्यसंक्रारपक्ष.
बाक्यार्थ the meaning of a sentence,
which comes as a whole composite
idea when all the constituent
words of it are heard: cf. पदानां
सामान्य वर्तमानानां यद्विशेषेSवस्थानं स वाक्यार्थे:,
M.Bh. on P.I.2.45 Vart. 4. Accor-
ding to later grammarians the
import or meaning of a sentence
( वाक्यार्थ ) flashes out suddenly in
the mind of the hearer immediate-
ly after the sentence is completely
uttered, The import is named
प्रतिभा by Bhartrhari, cf. Vakya-
padya II.45; cf. also वाक्यार्थश्च
प्रतिभामात्रविषय: Laghumajs. For
details and the six kinds of vaky्-
rtha, see Wikyapadiya II.154.
वाक्याथेचान्द्रका name of a commen-
tary on the Paribhasendusekhara
by Hari Sastrº Bhagawata.
वाक्यैकदेशा part of a sentence which
sometimes, on the strength
of the context, conveys the
whole meaning cf. दृश्यनेत हिं
वाक्येषु बाक्येक्रदज्ञान् प्रयुञ्जान: पदषु च
पदैकदंष्ट्रान् | प्रविद्दा पिण्डीम् प्रविशा तर्पणम्
पदेषु पदेक्रदळान्दखद्ते दत्तः सत्यभामा भामेति
M.Bh. on P.I.1.46 Wart. 3.
बाच् (1) expression from the mouth ;
speech; series of sounds caused
by expelling the air from the lungs
through differently shaped positions
of the mouth and the throat: cf
स संघातादीन् प्राप्य वग्भवति Vaj. Pr.I.9;
see the word वाणी; (2) the sacred
or divine utterance referring to
the Veda: cf. त्रय्या वाचः परं पदम् ; (3)
term used for उपपद् in the Jainen-
dra Vyākarana: cf. वाग्विभक्तेः कारक-
विभाक्षेतर्दलीयसे Jain. Pari. 10.
वाचक expressive, as contrasted with
द्योतक्र, यञ्जक, सूचक and भेद" which
41
वाजप्यायन
mean suggestive; the term is used
in connection with words which
directly convey their sense by
denotation, as opposed to words
which convey indirectly the sense
or suggest it as the prefixes or
Nipatas do.
वाचनिक expressly cited by a वचन or a
statement of the authors of the
Stra, the Warttika and the Maha-
bhSya, as contrasted with what
naturally occurs or is inferred from
their statements; cf. नेदं वाचानेकस-
लिङ्गता असंख्यता च ( अव्ययानाम् ) ( स्वाभा-
बिक्रमतत् M.Bh. on P.I. 1.38 Vart.
5 and P. II.2.6, cf. also M.Bh. on
P.I.2.64 Vart. 53.
वाचनिकी See वाग्वानक above: cf. किं
स्वाभाविकी निवृतिर्हेस्विद्वाचानेक्री M.Bh.on
P. II.2.6: cf. also the usual expres-
sion बाचनिक्री एषा with respect to
some Paribhass or maxims.
वाचिका expressing directly, denoting:
(fem. of वाचक ): cf. तयेारभिसंबन्धस्य
षष्ठी वाचिका भवति M. Bh. on P.II. }.1
Vart. 4.
वाच्य (l) directly expressed (sense) as
contrasted with ब्यङ्ग्य or ध्वनित: cf.
इदनार्थान् वाच्यान् दृष्ट्वा बुद्धौ कुर्यात्पौर्वापर्यम् |
M.Bh. on P. I.4.109 Vrt. 10; (2)
which should be stated or which de-
serves to be stated, The word वाच्य
is generally put in connection with
' the additions or corrections to the
stras by the Warttikakara and the
Mahbhasyakra in their explana-
tions: cf. तत्रैतावद्वाच्यम्, M.Bh. on P.
I.4.1 ; cf. also वाच्य ऊर्णोर्णुवद्भावःM.Bh.
on P. III.1. 22 Vart. 3; III. I. 36
Wrt. 6.
वाजप्यायन an ancient grammarian
who holds the view that words
denote always the jati i.e they
always convey the generic sense and
that the individual object or the
case is understood in connection

वाजसनेयिप्रातिशाख्य
322
वायु
with the statement or the word,as
a natural course,when the purpose
is not served by taking the generic
sense: cf. अाकृत्यभिधानाद्वा एकं दाब्दं
विभक्तौ वाजप्यायन अाचाये न्याय्यं मन्यते M.
Bh. on P. I.2.64 Vart. 35.
वाजसनेयेिप्रातिशाख्य the Pratisakhya
work belonging to the Vajasaneyi
branch of the White Yajurveda,
which is the only Pratisakhya
existing to-day representing all
the branches of the Sukla Yajur-
veda. Its authorship is attri-
buted to Katyayana, and on
account of its striking resem-
blance with Panini 's suitras at vari-
ous places, its author Kityayana
is likely to be the same as the
Varttikakra Katyayana. It is guite
reasonable to expect that the
subject matter in this Pratisakhya
is based on that in the ancient
Prtisakhya works of the same
Whiteschool of the Yajurveda.The
work has a lucid commentary
called Bhasya written by Uvvaga.
वाडव possibly the same as Kunara-
vadava; an ancient grammarian
quoted in the Mahabhasya; cf.
तत्र सौयैभगवतोक्तमनिटिज्ञो वाडवे: पठति,
M. Bh. on P. VIII. 2. 106 Vव्रrt 3.
khya works who believed in the
very feeble utterance ( लघुप्रयत्नतर )
of the consonants य and व, when
preceded by अ and standing at the
end of a word. See लघुप्रयत्न.
चाद्नक्षत्रमाला a work on grammatical
debates etc. by Appaya Dikita,
a well-known scholar and a seniof
contemporary of Jagannatha in
the seventeenth century.
वादि roots headed by बा and similar
to वा. Really there is no class of
roots headed by वा given anywhere
but in the interpretation of the
rule भूवादयेा धातव: it is suggested
that * the roots which are similar
to वा are termed roots (धातु)' could
also be the interpretation of the
rule: cf. भ्वादय इति च वादय इति M.Bh.
on P. [. 3. l . Vairt. ll .
वादिघटमुद्र name of a commentary
on the Sarasvata Vykarana by a
grammarian Jayanta.
वान the suffix बन् mentior:ed as वान्
in the Atharvapratisakhya and
illustrated in the word ऋताव1नं: cf
A. Pr. III. 24.
वामन name of one of the joint
authors ofthe well-known gloss or
वृति upon the Sutrasof Panini, who
वाणी speech; utterance; the same as
वाच् which is believed to be of four
kinds as cited by the grammarians
and explained by Bhartrhari; the
four kinds are based upon the
four places of origin, the three
first places belonging to the in-
articulate speech and the fourth
belonging to the articulate one:
cfचत्वारि वाक्परिमिता पदानि तानि विदुर्ब्राह्मण
य मनीषिणः | गुह्या त्रीणि निहिता नेङ्गयन्तिं तुरीयं
वाचेी मनुष्या वदन्ति, M. Bh. I Ahnika
l and the Pradipa and Uddyota
lived in the seventh century A. D.
It cannot be ascertained which
portion of the Kasika was written
by Wamana and which by his
colleague जयादित्य, There was ano-
ther famous scholar of Kashmir by
name Wamana who fdourished in
the tenth century and who wrote
an independent grammar treatise
विश्रान्तविद्याधर, together with उणाद-
सूत्रवृति and लिङ्गानुशासन.
वायु air or प्राण, which is believed to
spring up from the root of the
thereon.
वात्स् an ancient writer of Prati्त्र-
navel and become a cause (even a
material cause according to some
scholars) of sound of four kinds

वारणावतेइा
323
वार्तिककार
produced at four different places,
the last kind being audible to us;
cf. प्राणे वर्णानभिव्यज्य वर्णेष्वेवेीपठयते Vak-
yapadya I.1 16;cf. also R.Pr.XIII.
13, V.Pr. I.7-9; T.Pr.II.2: Sik of
Panini st. 6.
वारणावतेइ a grammarian of the
seventeenth century who wrote a
gloss named अमृतबुति on the Pra-
krya-kaumudi.
वाख्घ a work attributed to बररुचि: cfः
वाररुवं काव्यम् M. Bh.on P. IV.3.101
cf also वाररुने ग्रन्थ: S.K.on P.IV.8.
101 This work possibly was not
a grammar work and its author
also was not the same as the
Varttikakra Katyayana. See
वरुरुवि above. The name वाररुचव्याकरण
was given possibly to Ktyyana?s
Prakrit Grammar, the author of
which wa% वररुचि surnamed Kव्रty-
yana For details see p.395 Vyaka-
rana Mahabhsya Vol. VII. D. E.
Society's Edition.
बारस्रवकारिका an ancient grammar-
work in verse believed to have
been written by an ancient scholar
' of grammar, who, if not the same
as Katyyana who wrote the
Wrttikas, was his contemporary
and to whom the authorship of the
Undi Sutras is ascribed by some
scholars. See वररुव.
वार्त ofno use; serving no purpose;
the word is possibly derived from
वात ( लेक्रवात ) meaning people's
gossip: cf एतच वातम् M.Bh.on P.I.2.
64 Vart. 25; also on P. II.2.24, II.
4.13 etc.
वार्तिक a statement which is as much
authoritative as the original
statement to which it is given
as an addition for purposes
of correction, completion or ex-
planation. The word is defined
by old writers in an often-guoted
verseउक्तानुक्तदुरुक्तानां चिन्ता यत्र प्रवर्तते | तं
ग्रन्थं वार्तिकं प्राहुर्वार्तिक्रज्ञा मनीषिण:|This de-
finition fully applies to the vartikas
on the Stºtras of Paijini. The word
is explained by Kaiyapa as वृत्तौ साधु
वार्तिकम् which gives strength to the
supposition that there were glosses
on the Sitras of Prini of which
the Varttikasformed a faithful pithy
summary of the topics discussed.
The word vrttika is used in the
Mahbhasya at two places only
हृत: पूर्वविप्रवेषेधौ वार्तिकेनैव ज्ञापित: M.Bh.
on P.III. 4.37 and अपर आहृ यद्वार्तिक
इति M.Bh. on P. II.2.24 Vart. 18.
In अपर अहृ यद्वार्तिक इति the word is
contrasted with the word वृत्तिसूत्र
which means the original Sutra
(of Panini ) which has been actua-
Ily quoted, viz. संख्ययाव्ययासलाo II.2.
25. Nagesa gives * सूत्रे अनुक्तदुरुक्तचि-
न्ताकरत्वं वार्तिक्रत्वम् as the definition of
a Varttika which refers only to two
out of the three features of the
Wrttikas stated above. If the word
उक्त has been omitted with a pur-
pose by NgeSa, the definition may
well-nigh lead to support the view
that the genuine Varttikapatha of
Katyyana consisted of a smaller
number of Varttikas which along
with a large number of Varttikas
ofother writers are guoted in the
Mahabhasya, without specific
names of writers, For details see
pages 193-223 Vol. VII Patafijala
Mahabhasya, D.E, Society's Edi-
tion.
चार्तककार believed to be Katyayana
to whom the whole bulk of the
Vrttikas quoted in the Mah∂-
bhsya is attributed by later
grammarians. Patafijali gives the
word वार्तिकक्रार in four places only
(in the Mahabhsya on P.I.1.34,
III.1.44: III.2.118 and VII.1.1)
out of which his statement स्यादि-

वार्तिकपाठ
वाधेः पुरान्तः यद्यद्विशेषणं भवति किं वार्तिककारः
प्रातिषेधेनं करोति in explanation of the
Slokavrttika स्यादिविधिः...इति हुवता
कात्यायननहृ, shows that Pataiali
gives कात्यायन as the Varttikakara
(of Varttikas in small prose state-
inents) and the Slokavirttika is not
composed by Katyyana. As asser-
tions similar to those made by
other writers are quoted with the
names of their authors ( भारद्वाजीयाः,
सौनागाः, क्रीड्याः etc.) in the Maha-
bhagya, it is evident that the
Varttikas quoted in the Mah-
bhagya- (even excluding the
Slokavarttikas) did not all belong
to Kव्रtyayana. For details see pp.
193-200, Vol. VII, Vyakarama
Mahabhsya, D. E. Society's
Edition.
वार्तिकपाठ the text of the Varttikas
as traditionally handed over in the
oral recital or in manuscripts As
observed above(see वार्तिक),although
a large number of Vrttikas quot-
ed in the Mahabhsya are ascrib-
ed to Katyayana, the genuine
Varttikapatha giving such Vartti-
kas only, as were definitely com-
posed by him,has not been preser-
ved and Nagesa has actually gone
to the length of making a state-
ment like * वार्तिक्रपाठ: भ्रष्ट:* ; cf.
. Uddyota on P.I.l.I2 Varttika 6.
वार्तिकवचन a small pithy statement
or assertion in the manner of the
original sitras which is held as
much authoritative as the Sutra:
cf न ¶मीं वृत्तिसूत्रवन्वनप्रामाण्यादिति | किं
तर्हि | वार्तिकवचनप्रामाण्यादिति [ M.Bh. on
P.HI..1.1 Varttika 23.
वार्तिकसिद्धान्त categorical conclusive
statements made by the Varttika-
kara many of which were cited
later on as Paribhasas by later
. writers For details see pp. 212-
324 वासरूपस्थाय
220 Vol. VII, Vyakarana Mah-
bhsya, D. E. Society's edition.
वार्तिकस्त्र the same as वार्तिक्रवचन which
see above. The Varttikas are
termed Varttika stºtras on account
of their close similarity with the
original Sutras, which in contrast
are termed Vrttistras.
वाष्र्यायाण an ancient grammarian
quoted in the Mahabhasya and
the Nirukta in connection with
the six-fold division of bhva or
verbal activity; cf. षड् भावाचकार
भवन्तीति वाप्ययणि: l जायत अस्ति विपरि-
णमते वर्धते अपक्षीयते विनश्यतीति Nir. I. 8.
वावबन citing an option not specifi-
cally by the particle वा, but by the
terms विभाषा, अन्यतरस्याम् and the like;
cf हृक्रोर्वावचने अभिवादिदृशेारात्मनेपद् उप-
संख्यानम् P. I. 453 Varf. !: cf. also
M.Bh. on P.I.3.79, II.1.18 etc.
बावधि, वाविधान also, laying down an
option regarding a grammatical
operation; cf. स्वस्तियेोगे चतुर्थ कुदालार्थे-
राइिषि वाविधानात् P.II.3.16 Vart.1 ; cf.
also अविशेषेण अयादनिां वाविधिमुक्त्वा सार्व-
धातुके नित्यमिति वक्ष्यामि M.Bh.on P.III.
1.31 Vart, 2; cf. also M.Bh. on P.
III.1.94.
वासरूपन्याय the dictum of applying
optionally any two or more krt
affixes to a root if they become
applicable at one and the same
time, only provided that those
affixes are not in the topic of
स्त्रियाम् (P.III.3.94 etc.) and are not
the same in appearance such as ण,
अ, क etc , which are the same wiz.
अ; cf. बासरूपेSस्त्रियाम् P.III.1.94; cf.
also वासरूपन्यायन ण्बुलपि भावेष्यति M.Bh.
on P.III.2.146 Vart.1;cf.also M.Bh.
on P.III.2.150 Vart. 1, The word
वासरूप and वासरूपविधि are also used
in the same sense: cf. ताच्छीलिका
वासरूपेण न भवन्तीति M.Bh. on P.III.

वासुदेव
325
चिक्ल्प
2.150 Vart. 2, as also ताच्छीलिकेषु वास-
रूपविधिनास्ति Par. Sek. Pari. 67.
वासुदेव दीक्षित son of महुादेव दीक्षित, the
author of the Balamanorarm, a
commentary on the Siddhanta-
kaumudi. Vasudevadiksita was a
resident of Tanjore who lived in
the beginning of the eighte enth
century A.D. and wrote a few
works om Prvamima:hs.
वासुदेव ( शास्त्री) surnamed Abhyankar,
who lived from 1863 to l942 and
did vigorous and active work of
teaching pupils and writing essays,
.articles,	commentary works and
original works on various Sh∂stras
with the same scholarship, zeal
and acumen for fifty years inPoona.
He wrote गृढार्थप्रकाराः a commentary
on the LaghuSabdendusekhara and
तत्त्वादर्श a commentary on the Pari-
bhasendusekhara in 1889. His
edition of the Patafijala Mah-|
bhsya with full translation and
notes in Marathi can be called his
magnum opus. See अभ्यंकर.
वि (l) Undi affix धि guoted by Panini
in the rule जाग्रोsबचिण्ण्डसु VII.
1.85; e.g. जाएविः; cf. जुबुरुनृजाएभ्य:
किन् Undi IV. 54; also वृदृभ्यां विन्
IW.53; (2) common term for the
affixes किम् , किन् , वि, पित्र, ण्विन् ,
विच् and विद्. See व्,
विक् augment वि as seen in the word
दविद्युतत् given as a niptana in the
stra दाधार्तदर्धति ...P. VII.4.65; cf.
दविद्युतदिति द्युतयेङ्कलुगन्तस्य दातरि अभ्यासस्य
सेप्रसारणाभाव: अत्वं विक् अागमश्च निपात्यत
Ka8. on P.WII.4.65.
विकम्पित a fault in the pronunciation
of vowels, the uttcrance being
attended with a kind of tremor;
cf. ग्रस्तं निरस्त...विकल्पितम् | M. Bh. at
the end ofAhnika 1.
विकरण an affix placed between a
root and the personal ending, for
showing the specific tense or mood
or voice to convey which, the
personal ending is applied; e. g.
the conjugational signs राप् , क्रियन् ,
श्रु, ढा, श्रम्, उ, श्रा and यक्, आम् , as
also स्य, तास् , सिप् , अाम् and च्लि with
its substitutes. Although the term
विकरण is used by ancient grammari-
ans and freely used by the Maha-
bhsyakara in connection with the
affixes, mentioned in the sutras of
Paini, such as इप् , इयन् and
othcrs, the term is not found in
the Stras of Panini. The vika-
ramas are different from the major
kinds of the regular affixes तिङ्क, कृत्य
and other similar ones. The vika-
ranas can be called कृत्; so also, as
they are mentioned in the topic
(अधिक्रार) of affixes or Pratyayas,they
hold the designation * pratyaya '.
For the use of the word विकरण see
M.Bh. on P. I.3. 12, III, 1.31 and
VI. 1.5. The term धिंकृरण is found .
in the Yājñavalkya Siks in the
sense of change, ( cf. उपधारञ्जनं
कुर्यान्मनोर्विकरणे सति ) and possibly the
ancient grammarians used it in
that very sense as they found the
root कु modified as करु or कुरु, or चि
as न्विनु, or भू as भच before the re-
gular personalendings तिप् , तस् etc.
विकर्ष (1)a fault in the utterance of a
vowel with its proper accent
(acute,grave or circumflex) which
results from the proper accent
being mixed with another in the
utterance: cf.विक्रर्षे नामाश्छष्टता Uvvata '
on R. Pr. III. 18: (2) protraction
of the accent especially of the
circumflex accent.
विकल्प choice or option re , the
application of a rule as stated by
the word वा, विभाषा, अन्यतरस्याम् or the
like: cf.नति प्रतिषेधो वेति विकल्प: तयो:
प्रतिषेधविकल्पयोः " विभाषा इति संज्ञा भवति ,

विकासिपत 326 विगृर्हीत
विभाषाप्रकरणे प्रातर्द्धकििल्पे उपतिष्ठते | तत्र called प्रकृतिः cf. प्रकृतिरुपादानकारणं
प्रतिषेधेन समीकृतं धिष्ये प्रश्राद्विकल्पः प्रवर्तते | तस्यैव उत्तरमवस्थान्तरं विकृतिः Kas. on
KS. on P, I. 1 44. P. V. 1. 12.
विकल्पित made applicable optionally.
विकार lit. change: modification;
modification of a word-base or an
affix, caused generally by the
addition of suffixes: cf. प्रकृतेरवस्थान्तरं
विकार: Kas, on P. IV.3.134: cf. also
लेपागमवर्णविकारज्ञः हि सम्यग्वेदान् परिपाल-
यिष्यति Mahabhsya Ahnika 1.
विकाये lit. changeable; that which
gets changed in its nature; a
variety or subdivision of क्रर्म or the
object cf. त्रिविधं कर्म , निर्वत्र्यं विकार्य
प्राप्यं चेति | Ks. on P. III. 2.1.
The विक्रयेकमे is explained as यस्य
प्रकृत्युच्छदं गुणान्तरं वा उत्पद्यते तद्विकार्यम् !
यथा भुक्त ओदन: | |्यमान: केद[र: | Sp n-
graprakasa II ; cf also, Vakya-
padiya HII. 7.78.
विकर्ण a fault in the utterance of a
vowel when one vowel appears, or
is heard as another, cf.विक्रीणां वर्णान्तर
प्रस्मृत: ' एकंीप्यनक्रनिभसीत्यपर Pradipa
on the Mahabhasya Ahn. 1 end.
विक्रत mutilated, changed in nature
e. g. the word राम into रम् in राम
which is equivalent to राम् + औ.
For technical purposes in grammar
a word, although mutilated a litt!e
by lopa, gama or varavikra, is
lo pked upon as the original one for
undergoi.g operations cf एक्रद्ाव-
कृतमनन्यवत् Par. Sek. Pari. 37.
विकृतनिर्दा utterance of a word in its
mutilated form with some object
in view; e. g. दीव्यत् for दीव्यति ' in
प्राग्दीव्यतीSण् P. IV. 1. 8}; cf. किं पुनः
कारणं विकृतनिर्दह्वाः क्रियत [ M. Bh. 6n
P. IV.1.83; cf. also क्रर्षे इति धिकृत-
निर्दश: कृतेर्निवृत्त्यर्थ: Ks on P. VI. 1.
159;. cf. also गेहृ इति विकृतिकरणं
' विषयार्थम् Kas. on P.VI. 4. 89.
बच्चाति change, modification as differ-
ent from the original which is
विक्रतिवढी a work on the modified
recital of the Veda words, or
पदपाठविवृति, ascribed to Vydi who
is believed to have been a pupil of
वष्ट.
विछतिवळीटीका name of a commen-
tary on विकृतिवल्छी (which see above)
written by a Vedic scholar गङ्गाधर.
विक्रम (l) name given to a grave
vowel placed between two circum-
flex vowels, or between a circum-
flex and an acute, or between an
acute and a circumflex; cf.
रूबारेतयोर्मध्ये यत्र नावं स्यात्, उदात्तयेव
अन्यतरतो वा उदात्तस्वरितयेी: स विक्रम: T.Pr.
KIK.I ; (2) name given to a grave
vowel between a pracaya vowel and
an acute or a circumflex vowel:
cf. प्रचयपूर्वश्च क्रीण्डन्यस्य T.Pr.XIX.2:
(8) repetition of a word or पद् as
in the Krama recital of the Veda
words; (4) name given to a visar-
janiya which has remained intact,
as for instance in य्: प्रणते निमिषतः ;
cf. R.Pr. I.5; VI.1 ; the word विक्रम
is sometimes used in the sense of
visarjaniya in general: cf also
अनिङ्गयन् विक्रममेषु कुर्यात् R.Pr. XIII.11.
विक्रान्त name given to a sarhdhi
where the visarga remains intact
although it can , optionally be
changed into a sibilant consonant;
e.g. यः ककुभ:, यः पञ्च, यो वः शिवतमो
रसः	cf विक्रान्तसंधिस्तु प्राकृतेापधो वेदितब्य
यत्र विसर्गः श्रूयेत R.Pr.IV.11.
विछिष्ट a fault in the utterance of a
letter when there does not take
place the necessary contact with
the proper place of the utterance
of a word; cf. हृन्वेी: प्रकर्षेणे सर्वतश्चलने
धिक्षेत्रं नाम देीषो भवति | विधिं नामं असे-
युक्तम् R.Pr.XIV.3. _
विगृर्होत shown by separating the com-

विग्रहृ
327
विचिकित्सार्थ|्य
bined elements, for instance, the
two or more words in a compound
or, the base or affix from a word
which is a combination of the
base ( प्रकृति ) and the affix (प्रत्ययः);
cf. तदेव सूत्रं विगृहीतं व्याख्यानं भवति M.Bh.
on I.1. Ahmika 1, Vart. 11, 14;
also cf. अवारपाराद् विगृहीतादपि P. IV.2.
93 Vºrt.!.
विग्रहृ lit, separation of the two parts
of a thing; the term is generally
applied to the separation of the
constituent words of a compound
word: it is described to be of two
kinds : ( a ) शास्त्रीयविग्रहृ or technical
separationg e. g. राजपुरुष्: itato राजन्
डले पुरुष सु and ( 2 ) लौकिकविग्रहं or
common or popular separation ;
e. g. राजपुरूष: into राज्ञ: पुरुष:. It is
also divided into two kinds accor-
ding to the nature of the constitu-
ent words (a) खपदावग्रहृ separation
by means of the constituent
words, e.g. राजहितम् into राज्ञ हृितम्;(b)
अस्वपदधिग्रहृ, e. g. राजार्थम् into राज्ञ
इदम् ;or e.g. सुमुखींitato -ंीभने मुखं अस्याः
cf. M.Bh. on P.V.4.7. The com-
pounds whose separation into con-
stituent words cannot be shown
' by those words (viz. the constitu-
ent words) are popularly termed
nityasamsa. The term नित्यसमास is
explained as नित्यः समासे नित्यसमासः |
यस्य विग्रहेा नास्ति | M.Bh. on P.II.2.19
Vart. 4. The upapadasamsa is
described as नित्यसमास. Sometimes
especially in some Dvandva com-
pounds each of the two separated
words is capable of giving indivi-
dually the senses of both the words
e.g. the words द्याव and क्षामां of the
compound द्यावाक्षामा. The word धिग्रहु
is found used in the Pratisakhya
works in the sense of the separate
use of a word as contrasted with
the use in a compound; cf अच्छेति
विग्रहे प्लुतं भवति R.Pr.VII.1. धिग्रहृ
is defined as वृत्यर्थावबोधकं वाक्यं विग्रहः
in the Siddhantakammudj.
विग्रहृण enclosure or closure(वेछन)by the
use of the word इति as done in the
Krama and other Weda-recitals.
चिघत immolation; sacrifice; destru-
ction, as applicable to a word or
part of a word or a relation of
words cf. अनेकाल्त्वस्य तदाश्रयत्वाद् वर्णा-
दृढास्य विधाते न भविष्यति M.Bh. om P.
I.1.50 Virt. 15: cf also the famous
Paribhas संनिपातलक्षणो विधिरनिमित्तं तद्वि-
घातस्य Par. Sek. Pari. 85; M.Bh. on
P,I.1.24 etc.
चिघछत् impediment to an operation
caused by something preceding
on account of its coming in the
way: a vyavaya or vyavadhana or
intervention which is not admissi-
ble just as the interruption of pala-
tals, linguals, dentals and sibilants
excepting है for the change of न्
intoग् : cf. अब्यवतं विग्रहं विघ्नकृद्भिः R.Pr.
V.25.
विट् krt affix वि (which also becomes
nil or zero) applied to a root in the
sense of an agent, as observed in
Vedic and classical use, as also to
the root यज् with उप and roots
ending in अा generally in Vedic
Literature but sometimes in popu-
1ar language; cf. विजुपे छन्दसि ' औातेो
मनिन्कानब्वनिपश्च | अन्येभ्योपि दृश्यन्ते |
क्रीलालपाः, द्युर्भयाः etc. Ks on P. III.
2.73, 74, 75.
विचार विचारणा, examination, guestion
or topic or subject for examina-
tion:cf. कुतः पुनरियं विचारणा l M.Bh.
on P. I. 1.50 Wart. 1.
विचाळ immolation, destruction: cf.
वर्णाश्रयः प्रत्ययो बर्णविचालस्यानिमित्तम् , दाक्षिः
M.Bh .on, P.I.1.39 Vart. 10; cf.
also Par. Sek. on Pari. 85.
विचिकित्सार्थ्य the indeclinable नूनम्
called धिचिकित्सार्थ्य in the Nirukta;
the word विचिकित्सा is explained as

_
वांचत्र
confirmation after deliberation by
Durgicrya. cf भाषायाम् ' उभयमन्व-
ध्यायम् | विचिक्रित्सार्थ्यश्र पदपूरणश्र ' मूनमिति
विचिक्रित्साथींय: Nir. I.5.
विचित्र of various or wonderful kinds
beyond our ken or comprehension
cf. विचित्रास्तद्धितवृत्तय: M.Bh. on P.HI.
4.32 Vart. 7; VI. 1. 99 Vart. 2.
विचेछद् (l) breach or break (in the
Samhitapa:ha); utterance of words
separately by breaking their
coalescence: cf. पदविच्छद: असंहृितः V.
Pr.I.156; (2) doubling of a conso-
mant technically called यम ; cf.
अन्त:पदे अपञ्चमः पञ्चमेषु विच्छेदम् V.Pr.
IV.163.
विजयगणिन् a.Jain grammarian of the
seventeenth century who wrote a
commentary on the Haimalaghu-
prakriy.
विजया name of a commentary on the
Laghusabdendusekhara by Siva-
narayana.
विजयानन्द् called also विद्यानन्द, a gra-
mmar scholar of the Kitantra
school who wrote (l) Ktantra-
dhatuvrtti (2) Ktantrottara and
(3) Kriyakalapa.
विज्ञान specific knowledge or under-
standing: cf. सिद्ध तु धर्मापदेशने अनवयव-
विज्ञानाद्यथां लौकिकवैदिकेषु: M. Bh. on P.
VI.1. 84 Vart.5.
विज्ञय a matter of special understand-
ing; the phrase अब्यं चैतद्विज्ञेयम् very
frequently occurs in the Mahabha-
Sya; cf M.Bh. on P.I.1.1, 3, 5, 22,
I.2.47, 48, 64, I.4.23 etc.
विद् krt affix ( वि, व् or nil) applied to
the roots जन्, सन्, खन् , क्रम् and गम्
and to the root अद् in special cases
as seen in Vedic Literature; e.g.
अब्जाः, गेषाः, कूपखा:, दधिक्रा:, etc.
विद्वल or विछलेश grandson of रामचन्द्रोत्र
the author of the प्राक्रियाक्रौमुदी. He
was aTelagu Brahmana of Andhra
328
" who lived in the beginning of the l
विधि
sixtcenth century and wrote a
commentary named प्रसाद on the
Prakriy्-Kaumudi and two small
works अव्ययार्थानरूपण and पाणिनिसूत्रवृति.
विडच् or fबडच् tad. affix विड applied
to the word नि in the sense of
depression of the nose. See under
बिडच्: cf. P. V.2.32.
विद्यानन्द् See विजयानन्द.
विद्यानिवास name of a commentary
on Bopadeva's Mugdhabodha.
विद्याविनोद् grandson of Rameswara-
bhatta of Pratisthana who wrote a
grammar of the Prakrta dialects.
विद्वत्प्रबोधिनी name of a commentary
on the Sarasvata-prakriya by a
grammarian named Rama.
विघमेक possessed of different phone-
tic properties.
विधब् tad. affix विध applied to the
words भौरिके and others in the Sepse
offinhabited country'; e.g. भौरिके-
विधः, वैपेयविध:; cf. Kas. on P. IV.
2.54.
विघा characteristic feature of an
activity; cf. संख्याया विधार्थे धा Í विधा
प्रकारः सर्वक्रियाविषय एव गृह्यत Kas. on P.
V.3.42.
विधान (I) prescription, statement; cf
लेपे हृि ( प्रत्ययलक्षण-) विधानम् P.I. I. 62
Vart. 3; cf. also तत्र वृद्धिविधानम्. P.
VI. 1.85 Vart. 16; (2) instrument
or cause of an activity; cf. विधिवि-
धानावधिभाजां त्रयाणां संनिधनि तदन्तविधेि-
भेवति Sradeva Pari. 13.
विघारण mention ofa consonant as
intact i.e. without any phonetic
coalescence or संधि; the same as
अाभनिधान. The term is used in this
sense in the Pritisakhya works.
विधि (l) a prescriptive rule ; cf. तत्र
अपूर्वं विधिरस्तु नियमेोस्तु इत्यपूर्वं एव विधि-
भेधेिप्यति न नियम: M.Bh.on P.I.4.3;
ct also समर्थः पदविधिः ， विपूर्वाद्वाञ्ज: कर्म-
साधन इकार्:	विधीयत धिाधरिति M.Bh.on

बधबलीयस्त्व
329
विन्यय
P.II. 1.!: (2) prescription, state-
ment; injunction; cf. अस्ति भावसा-
धन: । विधानं वेिधि: | M.Bh. on P. I. 1.
57.
विधिबलीयस्त्व the superior strength
of an injunctive rule; the term is
very frequently used by gramma-
rians in speaking about]the rela-
tive strength of rules; cf the term
लेापाबाधबलीयस्त्व. M.Bh. on P.VII.2.3.
विधिवाक्य an injunctive statement
or sentence.
विधय (l) predicate as constrasted
with उद्दय: cf.समर्थाधिकारस्य विधेयसामाना-
धिकरण्यनियमेनर्थक्र: M.Bh. on P.II.1.
1 Vart. 17: (2) that which should
be prescribed as contrasted with
प्रतिषध्य: cf. तिङ्क च काचाद्विधेय: काश्चत्
प्रातषेध्य: M.Bh. on P.I. 2.64 Vart.9.
विध्यादि the senses headed by विधि as
given in the rule विधिनिमन्त्रणामन्त्रणाधी-
ष्टसंप्रश्नप्रार्थनेषु लिङ्क P. III. 3.16I ; cf.
विध्यादिषु सप्तमी च Kat. III.1.20; cf.
also विध्यादिषु क्रियार्थीाछड् भवति Candra
Vyak. I.3. l2l.
विधेयकवाक्यता formingone singlestate-
ment or idea with the prescriptive
statement: union with the prescrip-
tive rule so as to form one rule
with it. The terrn is used in conn-
ection with प्रातषेध or prohibitive
assertions which have to be ex-
plained in combination with the
prescriptive sentences or vidhi-
vakyas; cf. निंषधवाक्यानामपि निधथ्य-
विशेषाकाङ्क्षत्वाद्विधेयकवाक्यतयैवान्वयः Par.
Sek. on Pari. 2, 3.
विन tad. affix ( विनी ) in the sense of
possession applied to the words
तपस् , सहृन, ऊर्जस्, माया, मघा, खज् and
words ending in असु, as also wher-
ever it is seen ( बहुलं ) in Wedic
literature: e. g. तपस्विन् , ऊर्जस्विन् ,
मायाविन्, स्राविन् , पयस्विन् etc.: cf. P. V.
2.102, 114, 121, 122.
विनत cerebralized, turned into a
42
cerebral letter ण् or : see the
word नति meaning cerebralization
or Mirdhanyabhava.
विनयविजय a.]ain grammarian who
has written a gloss on हेमलधुप्राक्रिया.
वि|्यादि a class of words headed by
विनय to which the taddhita affix
, इक ( ठक् ) is applied without any
change ofsense:cf.विनय एव वैनायेक:
शमायेक्र: । औपथिकः Kas. om P.V.4.34.
विनाम cerebralization; cf. the word
नति; the word was used in ancient
grammar works in the sense ofणत्व
( change of न् into ण् ): cf. अग्रहृणं
धन्नुड्वधिलादेशविनामषु ऋकारग्रहणम्: M.
Bh. on P.VIII.4.1 Vart. 2.
चिनाइा disappearance, elision; the
word is frequently used in the
sense of lopa; cf. एतच नित्य्षु इाब्देषु
नेापपद्यते यस्सतो नाम विनाज्ञा: स्यादंसतीं व
प्रादुर्भीव: M.Bh. on P. I.1.56 Vart.12.
वनि tad. affix धिन्. See the word विन्.
विनिग्रहार्थाय meant to cause prohibi-
tion or opposition; cf अहृ इति च हृ
इति च विनिग्रहृर्थायौ इदं हृ करिष्यति | इदं
न करिष्यतीति Nir.I.5.
विनिमित्त caused by different condi-
tions; due to different causes cf.
बहुनड्वांहि ब्राह्मणकुलानि विनिमित्तावतौ M.
Bh. on P.VII.1.72 Vart. 3.
विनियोगr employment separately of
different persons or things for
different purposes; cf. अहेति विनियोगे
व P.VIII. 1.61;cf. also अहृ विनियोग !
धिनियेागेा नाम द्वयेः पुरुषयेiरकास्मन्कर्मणि
एकस्य पुरुषस्य संबन्धः अन्यस्मिन्कर्मणि अपरस्य
V.Pr.VI.21.
विनिवतेक lit. sending away: causing
prohibition: cf. विद्वेषण , निवर्तयतीति
धिनिवर्तकः | त्वयैवेति विनिवर्तकाधिकारकावधा-
रक्रा: T.Pr. XXI[.6.
विन्यय the same as विन्यास; placing or
employment of the instrument of
sound to touch the various places
or sthanas where sound is produc-

विपरिणाम
330
विभक्तिः
ed:cf. औनुप्रेदानात्संसगत् स्थानात् करणविन्य-
यात् । जायते वर्णवैशेष्यं परीमाणाञ्च पञ्चमात् ll
T. Pr, XXIII.2.
विपरिणाम change; cf. कार्यविपरिणामाद्वा
सिद्धम् | कायेस्य सेप्रत्ययस्य विपरिणामः कार्य-
धिपरिणाम: M.Bh. on I.1.56 Vart. 14.
The word is very frequently used
in connection with a change of
the case of a word in a grammar
rule which becomes necessary for
interpretation; cf. विभक्तिविपरिणामाद्वा
सिद्वम् as also अर्थद्विभक्तिविपरिणामो भवति !
M.Bh. on P.I.3.9,12:V.3.60, VI. ] .
4, VII.3.50.
विपरीत (1) in the opposite or reverse
way: cf. विपरीताश्चेति वक्तव्यम् ， पारावारीण:
M.Bh. on P. IV. 2.93 Wart. 2; (2)
change of न into इ, seen sometimes
in Wedic Literature when that ऋ is
preceded or followed by a palatal
letter: e.g. श्टङ्ग into शङ्ग (Rk. Sarhh.
V-2.9) बिभृयात् into बिभियात्(Rk.Safah.
x.x.9) विवृत into विचित्त Rg. Veda
II.27.16: cf. अनन्तरं तद्विपरीतमाहुरुताल|्थ
श्ङ्क बिभृयाद्ववृताः R.Pr,XIV.17.
विपर्यय change in the reverse order ;
reverse transposition; interversion;
cf. the usual expression वर्णविपर्यय.cf.
वणीगमाद् भवद्धंसः सिंहो वर्णविपर्ययात् | S.K.
on P.VI.3.109. The word व्यत्यय is
used in this sense in the Mahव्र-
bhasya; cf. वर्णव्यूत्यये क्तस्तर्कः | हिंसे:
सिंहृ: ! M.Bh. on Siva Stºtra 5 Vart.
15; cf. also Kas. on P.VI.3.109 and
Candra Wyakarana II.2.48.
विप्रकर्ष distance, standing at a dis-
tance: cf. न च कालनक्षत्रयां: संनिकर्षवि-
प्रकर्षे स्त: M.Bh. om P.IW.2.8.
विप्रकृष्ट remote; at a distance,with a
word or two intervening: cf.
संनिकृष्टविप्रकृष्टयेाः संनिकृश्टस्य l given like a
Paribhas-Sitra V.Pr.I.144.
विप्रतिपन्न (1) doubtful: a matter of
doubt; cf. विद्याद् विप्रतिपन्नानां पादवृत्ताक्षरै-
ऋचाम् R.Pr.XVII.13; (2) perverted:
cf. तेभ्य एवं विमतिपन्नबुद्धिभ्यः अध्येतृभ्यः इदं
शास्त्रमन्वाचष्ट M.Bh. on I.1 Ahmika 1.
विप्रातषिद्ध standing in conflict; con-
flicting contradictory; cf. परस्परविरुद्धं
विप्रतिषिद्धम् Kas. on P. II 4. 13.
विप्रतिषेध confict, oppositiong oppo-
sition or conflict between two
rulcs of equal strength, which be-
come applicable simultaneously
when Pamini's dictum विप्रतिषेधे परे
कार्यम् applies and the rule mention-
ed later on, or subsequently, in the
Astadhyay is allowed to apply: cf.
विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् P.I.4.2: cf. also
यत्र द्वौ प्रसङ्गौ अन्यार्थौ एकस्मिन्युगपत् प्राप्नुतः
स तुल्यबलविरोधी विप्रतिषेध: Kas. on P.I.
4.2: cf. also विप्रतिषेध उत्तरं बलवदलेप
V. Pr. I.159. The dicturn of the
application of the subsequent rule
is adopted only if the conflicting
rules are of equal strength; hence,
rules which are either nitya, anta-
rathga or apavada, among which
each subsequent one is more power-
ful than the preceding one and
which are all more powerful than
the पर or the subsequent rule, set
aside the पर rule. There is another
dictum that when by the dictum
about the subsequent rule being
more powerful, an earlier rule
is set aside by a later rule, the
earlier rule does not apply again
in that instance, barring a few
exccptional cases; cf. सक्द्रतो विप्रतिषेधे
यद् वाधितं तद् बाधितमव | पुनःप्रसङ्गविज्ञानात्
सिद्वम् Par. Sek. Pari. 40, 39.
विप्रयोग use of a word against
the warrant of experience, i.e.
against what is actually seen; e. g.
दुइयंत खढत्रपि वेिप्रयेोगः , तद्यथा | अक्षीणि म
दर्शनीयान, पादे मे सुकुमारतरा: M. Bh.
on P.I.4.21 Vart. 1.
विप्रराजेन्द्र a grammarian who has
written पाणिनिसूत्रविवरण, a gloss on the
Sutras of Panini.
विमति lit. division, separation; sepa-

विभूतिपाद् 331 विभज्यान्वाख्यान
ration of the base i,e, that to a vowel. Such words are look-
factor which shows the ' base ed upon,2and are treated as inde-
separately The word विभाक्तं is
generally used in the sense of
case affixes; but in Paninis gra-
mmar the term विभक्ते is applied
also to personal endings appli-
ed to roots to form verbs; cf.विभाक्ते-
च ) सुसिङ्कौ विभक्तिसंज्ञौ स्तः S.K.on Pan.
I.4.104. The term is also applied
to tad.affixes which are applied
to pronouns, क्रिम् and बहु, ending in
the ablative or in the locative case
or in other cases on rare occasions.
Such affixes are तम् (तसिल् ), त्र, (त्रल्),
ह, अत्, दा, ऋड्ढि, दानीम्, थू ( थाल् ) and
थम् given n P.V.3.1 to V.3.26.The
case affixes are further divided into
उपपदविभक्ति affixes and कारकविभक्ति
affixes. For details see P.II.3.1
to 73.
विभत्तिपाद conventional name given
to the third pda of the fifth
Adhyaya of Panini's Asgadhyay, as
it begins with the Stra प्राग्दिशे
विभक्तिः P.V.8.1.
विभक्तिप्रतिरूपक a term applied to
such words ending with krt affixes
as appear similar to words ending
with case-affixes; such words have
no further case affixes put after
them, and hence, they are called
by the term avyaya* ; e.g. क्रतुम्: cf.
विभक्तिप्रातरूपकमव्ययम् similar to उपसगे-
विभक्तिस्वरप्रातरूपकाश्च निपाताः ganastitra
inside the.Cadigana P. I.4.57.
विभक्तिबलीयस्त्व the relative superior
strength possessed by the कारकवि-
भक्ति which takes place in superse-
ssion of the उपपदाबभक्ति when both
become applicable at one and the
same time: e.g. मुनित्रयं नमस्कृत्य and
not मुनित्रयाय नमस्कृत्य: cf. उपपदविभक्तेः
कारकविभक्तिर्बलीयसी Par. Sek. Pari. 94.
विभाक्तिस्वरप्रतिरूपक similar in form
' to a word ending in a case-affix or
clinablese.g. इनै:, चिरण, अस्ति, उ, ए
etc.; cf the usual expressions
तिडन्तप्रतिरूपकमव्ययम् etc. cf. विभक्तिस्वरप्र-
तिरूपकाश्च निपाता भवन्ति M. Bh. on P.
VIII.3.1: cf. :also उपसर्गविभक्तिरुबरप्र-
तिरूपकाश्च निपाताः!a gaasutra inside
the चादिगण mentioned in P.I.4.57.
विभक्त्यर्थे lit. the sense of a case-affix,
as also of a personal affix; the
term is applied to the Karaka
Prakarana or Kraka chapter or
topic in grammar where senses of
the विभाक्ति affixes are fully discuss-
ed and illustrated; cf. विभक्त्यर्था: a
chapter in the Siddhanta-kaumudi
of Bhattoj Diksita.
विभक्त्यर्थनिर्णय a general term given
to a chapter on case-affixes as also
to treatises discussing the sense and
relations of case-affixes. There is
a treatise of this name written by
Giridhara and another written by
Jayaktsna Mauni.
काढा a work on syntax of
words written by a grammarian
named Kamalakarabhatta
वभक्त्यर्थप्रधान an indeclinable, which
is generally described as having the
sense of a case affix as predomi-
nant in it: e.g. तत्र, अधः, नीचैः etc.;
some indeclinables have the sense
of a root viz. the verb-activity as
predominant: cf. किंचिद्व्ययं विभक्त्यर्थ-
प्रधानं किाचत् क्रियाप्रधानम् M. Bh. on
P. I.1.38.
विभज्यान्वाख्यान a method of forming
a word, or of arriving at the com-
plete form of a word by putting
all the constituent elements of the
word such as the base, the affix,
the augment, the modification th9 .
accent, etc. one after another and
then arriving at the form instead
of completing the formation stage
वि

विभाग
by stage; e. g. in arriving at the
fbrm त़ौनी the wording जैन+ अ +ई
is to be considered as it stands
and not खौच + अ = खौन and then
ईौन+ई. The विभज्यान्वाख्यानपक्ष in
connection with the formation of
a word corresponds to the पद-
संस्कारपक्ष in connection with the
formation of a sentence.
विभाग (I) lit, division, splitting; the
splitting of a sentence into itscon-
stituent parts viz. the words; , the
splitting of a word into its con-
stituent parts viz. the base, the
affix, the augments and theilike:
(2) understanding or taking a
thing separately from a group of
two or more; cf.अवद्यं खल्वपि विभज्येो-
पपदग्रहणं कर्तव्ये ये हि बहुनां विभागस्तदर्थम् !
संाकादयकेभ्यश्च पाटलिपुत्रकेभ्यश्च माधुरा अाभ-
रूपतराः, M. Bh. on P.V.3.57: (3)
' splitting of a Samhita text of
the Vedas into the Pada text: cf.
अथादाबुत्तर विभाग हुरुचे व्यञ्जनपर: T. Pr.
III.l, where विभाग is explained as
पदविभाग by the commentntor cf.
also R.Pr.XVII.15; (4) the capa-
city of the Karakas (to show the
sense) cf. कारकशक्तिः विभाग: Nyasa
on Kas,I.2.44. _
विभाषा optionally, alternatively; the
word is explained by Panini as नवा
in the rule न वेति विभाषा (P.I.1.44)in
consonat.ce with its derivation
from the root भाष् with वि: cf. नति
प्रातषेधे वेति विकल्पस्तेयी: प्रतिषेधविकल्पथ-
र्विभूषति संज्ञा भवति विभाषाप्रदेशेषु प्रतिषेधवि-
कल्पावुपतिष्ठते | तत्र प्रतिषेधेन समीकृत बिदू
प्रश्चाद्विकल्पः प्रव्रर्तते. The option (वेभाषा)
is further divided into three kind
श्राते विभाषा, अप्राप्तं विभाषा and उभयत्र
विभाषा. For details see Mahabhgya
on P. I.1.44.
विभाषित (1) stated or enjoined optio-
' nally; cf मेध्यः पार्वभाषितः " आल्बेघव्ये
नालब्धव्य इति M. Bh. on P. I.1.44
Vart. 15; cf also मन्थ धातुर्विभाषितः ?
332
विमोक्ष
M. Bh. on P.III.1.27 Vart.4: (2)
roots taking personal affixes of
both the Padas.
चिमलकीर्ति a.Jain grammarian of the
sixteenth century who wrote a
short metrical work on the padas
of roots, known by the name
पद्यवस्थासूत्रक्ररिक्रा.
विमलमति an old grammarian who
is believed to have written a gloss
named भागवृति on Paini's Stras
to which the grammarians
Purusottamadeva, Siradeva and
others of the twelfth century
refer. SoIne scholars say that
भागवृति was written by भतृहरि;
but it is not feasible, as there is a
reference to Maghakavya in
भागवृति. In books on grammar,.
especially of the Eastern School in
the 11th and the 12th century,
there are several guotations from
the Bhagavgtti. See भागवृतं.
6V _ _
विमलसरस्वती a grammarian who
wrote a small grammar work
named रूपमाल[.
विमुक्तादि a class of words headed by
the word विमुक्त to which the tadd-
hita affix अ ( अण् ) is added in the
sense of * possessed of', provided
the word so formed, denotes a
chapter or a lesson of a sacred
work; cf.विमुक्ताब्देस्मिन्नस्ति वैमुक्तक्रोध्यायः
अनुवाक्री वा | देवासुरः l Ks. on P. V.
2.61. _
धिमेक्ष liberation of the last letter
(especially a class consonant) of a
word from phonetic modifications
by coalescence with the initial
letter of the following word, or
liberation of modification of a
consonant or vowel standing at the
end of a verse or sometimes even
in the middle of a verse: e.g. तत् नेी
मन्न:,सम् यौमि, संमधुमतीर्मधुमतीभिः पृच्यन्ताम्
द्युता दुदुहृ अहृयः: cf. V. Pr.I.90,91.

_
वराग
_ - -
वराग omission of a consonant, some-
times when it is preceded and also
followed by another consonant, as
if it were squeezed between the
two; this is no doubt looked upon
as a fault; e.g. the omission of
the consonant द् in उपमा षट् द्वा द्वा
uttered as उपमा षट् वा द्वा: cf.अन्वेान्यन
ब्यञ्जनानां विराग: R. Pr.XIV where
Uvvata explains धिराग as लेीप.
विराम an ancient term used in the
Pratisakhya works for a stop or :
pause in general at the end of a
word, or at the end of the first
member of a compound, which is
shown split up in the Padapaha,
or inside a word, or at the end ofa
word, or at the end of a vowel
when it is followed by another
vowel. Theduration of this virana
is different in different circum-
stances; but sometimes under the
same circumstances, it is describ-
ed differently in the different
Pratisakhyas. Generally,there isno
pause between two consonants as
also between a vowel and a conso-
nant preceding or following it.The
Taittiriya Pratisakhya has given
four kinds of विराम (a) ऋग्बिराम,pause
at the end of a foot or a verse of
duration equal to three matr्s or
moras, (b) पदविराम Bause between
two words of duration equal to
two matras; e. g. इषं स्बा ऊर्ज त्वा, (c)
pause between two words the pre-
ceding one of which ends in a
vowel and the following begins
with a vowel, the vowels being
not euphonically combined; this
pause has a duration ofone mitra
e,g. स इधान:, त एनम् , (d) pause bet-
ween two vowels inside a word
which is a rare occurrence; this
has a duration of halfarnatra;e.g-
प्रउगम्, तितउः; cf. ऋग्बिराम: पदविरामी
विवृत्तावरामः समानपदविवृतिविरामस्रिमात्री
333 बिरोध
द्विमात्र एकमात्रीर्धमात्र इत्यानुपूर्व्येण T. Pr.
XXII. 13. The word fवंवृत्ति is ex-
pained as स्वरयेरसंध:. The vivrtti-
virama is further divided into
वत्सानुसति which has the preceding
vowel short and the succeeding
long, बत्सानुसारिणी which has the pre-
cedimg vowel a long one and the
succeeding vowel a short one,
पक्रवती which has both the vowels
short, and पिपीळका which has got
both , the vowels long. This four-
fold division is given in the Siks
where their duration is given as
one matr, one matra, three-four-
ths of a matra and one-fourth of
a matra respectively. The dura-
tion between the two"words of a
compound word when split up in
the पदपाठ is also equal fo one
matr; cf. R.Pr.I.16. The word
वैराम occurs in Panini's rule विसमोs
वसानम् P.I. 4.110 where commen-
tatorshave explainedit as absence;
cf. वर्णानामभावोवसानसंज्ञः स्यात् S.K.on P.
1.4.II0: cf. also विरातार्वराम: । विरम्येत
अनेन इति वा विराम: Kas. on P.I.4.I 10.
According to Kasik even in the
Sarmhit text, there is a duration of
halfa matra between the various
phonetic elements, even between
two consonants or betweena vowel
and a consonant, which, however,
is quite imperceptible; cf. परो यः
संनिकर्षे वर्णानां अर्धमात्राकालव्यवधानं स
संहितासंज्ञो भवति Kas. on P. I.4.109
cf. also विरामे मात्रा R.T.35; cf. also
R.Pr.I.16 and 17. For details see
Mahabhsya on P. I. 4.109 and
I,4.110.
विरीसख् tad. affix विरस or बिरीस appli-
ed to the word नि in the sense of
flatness of nose. See बिरीस above: cf.
P. V. 2.32..
विरोध opposition or conflict between
two rules where, the rule which
| is subsequently mentioned is

विलमि्बत
334
विवृ
regarded as stronger and given pre-
ference to, as fair as its application
is concerned; cf. तुल्यबलयोर्विरोधे विप्र-
तिषेधः " विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् P. I.4.2: (2)
contradiction where one thing
prevents another cf. सर्वनामस्थान इतिं
अनुवर्तमानमपि विरोधादिहृ न संबध्यत Kas.on
P.VII.1.86.
विलासिबत a kind of tone where the
interval between the utterance of
two letters as also the time requir-
ed for the utterance of a letter is
comparatively longer than in the
other two kinds, viz. दुत and मध्य;
cf य इि दुतायां वृत्ते वर्णाः त्रिभागाधिकासेत
मध्यमायाम्,य मध्येमायां वर्णास्त्रिभागाधिकास्त
विलम्बितायाम् M. Bh. on P.I.1.70: cf.
also दुतविलम्बितयेोश्चानुपदेशात् P. I.1.69
Vart. 11.
विलस्बिता वृत्ति retarding or slow
manner of speech in which the
letters are uttered quite distinctly;
this kind of speech is followed by
the preceptor while teaching
Veda to his pupils; cf. अभ्यासार्थे दुतां
इतेि प्रयेोगार्थं तु मध्यमाम् ! ____
कुर्याद् वृत्तिं विलम्बिताम् R. Pr. XIII.
19, cf also T. Pr. XXIII. 24. See
विलम्बित above.
विलास name of a commentary by
Jayakrsha Maunj on the Madhya-
siddhānta Kaumud ofVaradarja.
विळिङ्ग (l) a substantive which is
declined in all the three genders
cf Hemacandra III. 1.142: (2) of
a different gender (although in
the same , case); cf. विलिङ्ग हि भवान्
लोके निर्द्दं करोति M.Bh. on P. I. 1.44
Vrt 5.
विलेप the same as लीप which see
above. The term विलेीप was possi-
bly in use before Parinis time;
cf उदात्तपूर्वे नियतस्वरोदय परो विलोपोsनियते
यदावर: R. Pr. XI. 26: cf. also }
विलेपी विनादाः Uvvata on R. Pr.
K[. 28,
_S - _
विलेीम reverse, in the opposite way;
the same as प्रतिलेीम which see
above.
विवक्षा intention or desire, generally
of the speaker with regard to the
sense to be conveyed by his
words; the words वक्तुर्विवक्षा are
often used by grammarians in
this sense: cf. विवक्षातः कारकाणि (Pari-
bhas)!cf. also कथम् विवक्षातः [ M. Bh.
on P.* I.1.66-67, I.2.64 Vart. 53,
IV. 1.3: cf. also विवक्षाधीना
इाब्दव्युत्पत्तिः Durgh. Vr. II.2.8; cf.
also इतिकरणे विवक्षार्थ: Kas. on P. II.
2.27, IV. 2.21, IV. 2.55,57, etc.
विवरण critical comment; a name
given by a writer of commentary
works to a critical commentary
work written by him; e. g. काश-
काविवरणपञ्जिका ( न्यास ) by Jinendra-
buddhi, भाव्यप्रदीपाविवरण ( उद्द्योत ) by
Nagesa, as also लबुढदन्दुखरविवरण
by BhāskaraSastr Abhyankar.
विवर्तन transformation; the word is
generally used in the sense of
transformation of the Padapatha
into the Sarhhitpatha.
विवार name given to an external
effort in the production of a
sound when the vocal chords of
the glottis or larynx are extended;
cf. कण्ठबिलस्य विकासः विवारः Uddyota
ora M. Bh. I. 1.9. cf. also विवरणं
क्रण्ठस्य विस्तरणम् | स एव विवाराख्य: बाह्यः
प्रयत्न: | तारीमन्सति श्वासेो नाम बाह्यः प्रयत्नः
क्रियत | तद्ध्वनिसंसर्गाद्धेषो नाम बाह्यः
प्रयत्नो जायते ' इति शिक्षायां स्मर्यते Bhsya
on T. Pr. II. 5.
विविभक्ति possessed of a different case-
affix cf. एवमपि विविभक्तीनां न प्राप्नोति !
समर्थात् समर्थं पदात् पदं इति M. Bh. on
P. II. 1.1. Vart 19; cf. also M.
Bh. on P. I. 1.27, VI. 4.1; VII.
2.82.
विवृत mame given to an internal
effort (as contrasted with the exter-

विवृतकण्ठ 335
विशेषविहित
nal effort named विवार ) when the | विझायवत् doubtful;possessed ofa doubt
tip, middle, or root of the tongue
which is instrumental in produc-
ing a sound, is kept apart from
about itself; cf. विज्ञायव्येा हि वृत्तये
भवन्ति | यथार्थं धिभक्कीः संनमयेत् | प्रत्तम् !
अवत्तम् ( Nir.II.1.
the place.o sthana of the Prg-| वह्निोष्ट (l) lit. specific; dualified by,
duction of the sound; cf. तत्रेीत्पत:
प्राग्यदा जिह्वाग्रोपाग्रमध्यमूलानि तत्तद्वर्णात्पात-
थानानां ताल्वादीनां दूरतः वर्तन्ते तदा विवृतता
TattvabodhinI on S. K. on P.I.1.9.
विवृतकण्ठ produced by fully extend-
ing the chords of the throat.
characterized by: cf. कैन नब्विाइ-
नानबु ; P. II.1.60: cf. also प्रातिपदि-
क्रग्रहृणे लिङ्गविशिष्टस्यापि ग्रहृणम् Par. Sek.
Pari.71 ; (2) different: cf. विइिराष्ट्-
लिङ्गानां भिन्नलिङ्गानां शब्दानां Kas. onP.II.
4.7. _
The first and the second class-| विछेाष specific nature causing a differ-
consonants are described as
विवृतकण्ठ; cf. तत्र वर्गाणां प्रथमद्वितीया
विवृतकण्ठाः श्वासानुप्रदाना अघोषा: M, Bh.
on P. I. 1.9. Vart. 2.
विवृततर possessed of the internal
effort viz. विवृत which is specially
ence; difference: specific feature;
cf. सामान्यग्रहणे विशेषानतिदेश:(Paribh)
Gf also यस्तु प्रयुङ्क्ते कुराले विशेषे etc.
M. Bh. in Ahmika 1; cf. also
क्रियावान्वक्रमाख्यातमुपसर्ग विशेषकृत् Uvvata
on V.Pr.VIII.50.
strengthened. The diphthongs have विशेषक determining: determinant; cf.
got at the time of their produc-
tion the internal effort धिवृत spe-
cially strengthened: cf. यदत्रवेर्ण,
विवृततरं तदन्यस्माद्वर्णात् M. Bh. on Siva
अस्त्यत्र विशेष: ' राजा विशेषकः प्रयुज्यत तन
विइिष्टस्यानयनं भवति; M. Bh. om P.II.
2.6: cf. अवयवे कृतं लिङ्गं समुदायस्य विशेषकं
भवतेि; M.Bh.on P.I.3.62 Wart.5.
Sitra 3,4 Vart. 10. विशेषण attribute: adjective; any
विवृत्त Separated, disjoined; the word
is used in connection with the
separated elements of a euphonic
combination; the words विाट,
word which gualifies another;
hence, subordinate; cf. विशेषणानां
चाजातः जातिर्यद्विशेषणम् , आहोस्वित् जातयीन
विशेषणानि ， M.Bh. on P.I.2.52.
अनेकीभूत and पृथग्भूत are used in the विशेषणसमास (1) a tatpurusa compo-
Sathe sense.
वडात (l) separation of the two
vowels which were euphonically
combined into one: the hiatus or
position of two vowels near each
other: cf. विवृतिः स्वरयेरसंधिः; (2) the
interval between two vowels
placed near each other; cf. स्वरयो-
रनन्तरयेरन्तरं विवृतः V. Pr. I. 19;
und of the type of Mayuravyarh-
sakadi where both the words
which are compounded together
are adjectival; (2) a karmadhara-
ya compound where the second
member is an adjective; a deter-
minative compound cf. गमनं च
यचिरं च गमनचिरामिति विशेषणसमासोयम् Kas.
on P,WI.2.6.
～ ो सेतं|ृत्स्वंहिर्तरं तद्विवृईि| वेिरेषप्रतिपत्ति a clgar understanding,
स्यात् Uvvata on R. Pr. II. I. This
interval is one matra according
to the Taittiriya Pratisakhya,
while it is only half-a-matra
or a determined sense in a place of
doubt: cf. व्याख्यानतो विशेषप्रतिपात्ि
संदेहादलक्षणम् Par. Sek. Pari, 1; also
M.Bh. in Ahhika 1.
according to the Rktantra and विशेषविहृित specifically prescribed, as
the Rk-Prtisakhya; cf. T. Pr.
XXII. 13; R. T. 36. See विराम.
contrasted with prescribed in gen-
eral which is set aside; cf. सामान्य-

व्य
[तस्य विशेषविहितेन बाधः; M.Bhon
p. II.1.24: cf also M.Bh. on P.III.
1.94 Vart.10, III. 2.77 etc.
विशेष्य substantive, as opposed to
बिइषेण adjective or qualifying : cf
भट्त्रं विशेषणेम्,भद्य विदेष्यम् K. on P.
II 1.57: cf. also विदेबणविशेष्यभावो
विवक्षाबन्धन: Ks. on P. II.1.36.
विश्रम्म relaxation, a characteristic of
the grave accent as contrasted
with अायाम which characterizes the
acute accent; cf उद्धनुिदेसेश्र
स्वरितश्च त्रयः स्वराः | आयामविश्रम्भाक्षेपेत
उच्यन्ते s क्षराश्रयाः ， श्रिम्भः अागमने
गात्राणाम् Uvvata on R.'r.III.1.विश्रम्भ
is the same as अन्ववसर्ग which is ex-
plained in the Mahbhasya as
अन्ववसग गात्राणां द्विथ्छिता. M. Blt on.
P. I.2.29,30,
विश्रान्तविद्याधर name of a grammar
work of a general type which
once occupied a prominent posi-
tion and was studied as a text
book of grammar, representing an
independent system. The work is
referred to by Hemacandra and
Haribhadra. It is attributcd to
Vamana who may be the same as
one of the joint writcrs of the
Kasikavrtti. In that case the date
of the work is the 7th century A.
D.;cf. the popular verse परेत्र पाणिनीं-
यज्ञाः केाश्वेत्कालपक्रविदा: ' एकं विश्रान्तविद्या:
स्युरन्ये संक्षिप्तसारका: guoted in Vol.VII
p. 388 Vyakarana Mahabh:ya
D.E. Society's edition.
विश्लेष separation of vowels that arc
in coalescence: showing separately
the two vowels that are combincd
together in the Sarmhita Text.Thc
term is contrasted with प्रश् which
is the same as एकादेशा in the termi-
nology of Panini.
विश्वकर्मशास्त्री name of a grammarian
who wrote a commentary सत्प्रक्रिया-
ब्याकृति on the Prakriy्-kaumudi.
336
विषथसप्तर्म
विश्वनाथदण्डभट् . a well-known gra-
mmarian of the nineteenth centify
who wrote several commentary
works of which the commentarie
on the two Sekharas of Nagesa are
well-know: to scholars.
विश्वरूप a grammarian of the sixtcenth
century who has written a small
grammar treatise called विश्वरूप-
निबन्ध.
__S < O -
वेश्वं%घरतtथ a grammarian who ha
written a gloss on the Siddhānta-
kaumudi.
विषमपद्व्याख्पt or विप्रमी (1) a critical
comtncht.ury Ot NagcSa's Laghu-
sabdendu8ckhara written by Rag-
havendrºicirya Gajendragadkar
of Satara who lived in the first half
of thc 1ninetcenth century and who
has also written a gloss named
त्रिपथगा on the Paribhisenduse-
khara; (2) name of a commentary
on Nagea's Paribhisendusekhara
by Cidrttpsraya: (3) name of a
commentary on Siradeva's Pari-
bhisivrtti.
विषमग्गता incorrect nasalization,
mentioncd as a fault of pronun-
ciation: cf. संद्धुत धिपमरागता च ' R.
Pr. KIV. 4.
विषय domain; province: cf. प्रकल्प्य
चापचाद्यं तत उत्सर्गाभिभिधिशते	Par.
Sck. Pari. 03.
विषयता being a subject of discussion
of; coming under the domain of,
applicability the meaning of
धिषयसप्तमी which is similar to विवक्षा.
विषयावषायभाच rclation between the
object and thc subjcct; cf. प्रतिलये
लक्षणभदादस्ति थियथि'श्रिभाश्रः Kaiyata on
P. VI. 4. 101 Virt.2.
विषयसप्तमीं locativc case denoting the
domain or province of a particular
suffix or a substitute or the like,
which could be actually applicd
later on; this विषयसHमी is contrast*

विषयार्थं
337
विस्पष्टादि
ed with परसतमी when the thing
mentioned in the locative case is
required , to be present in front;
cf.असति पौर्वापर्यं विषयसप्तमी विज्ञास्यत M.
Bh. on P. II. 4.35; cf. also अार्ध-
धातुके इति विषयसप्तमी KS, on P. II.
4.35; cf. also M. Bh. on P. III.
1.26 and IV. 1.90.
विषयार्थ meant for showing the pro-
vince or domain of the application
of a particular rule; gf. तत्रग्रहृणं
( in तत्रेपपदं सप्तमीस्थम् ) विषयार्थम् M.
Bh. on P. III. 1.92 Vart.6.
_K _
विष्णुपाडत a grammarian belong-
ing to the famous Sesa family of
grammarians, who has written a
small treatise on Paribhiss or
maxims of interpretation which
he has named परिभाषाप्रक्राइा.
विष्णुभदृ ( विष्णुशास्त्री भट ) a scholar of
grammar of the latter half of the
nineteenth century who has
written learned commentaries om
the works of Nagesa Bhatta, two
of which wiz. चिचन्द्रिका and विष्णुभढी
are well known to scholars.
विष्णुभई name given to the commen-
tary on the Paribhgendusekhara
written by Visnubhatta. See विष्णु-
भ above.
विष्णुमित्र a Wedic scholar who wrote
a gloss on the Rk-Pritisakhya
which is known as पार्षद्याख्या.
विष्णुमिश्र a scholar of the Supadma ]
system of grammar who has
written a commentary named
मकरन्द on the सुपद्मव्याकरण and also
a commentary on the सुपद्मसमाससंग्रहृ.
विस् aspiration, leaving of the
breath generally at the comple-
tion of the utterance of a word
when there is a pause; the term
' विसर्जनीय was in use in ancient
times. Although not mentioned
in his alphabet by Panini, this
Phonetic element, visarga, is looked
43
_
i
upon as a letter: it is mentioned
as one of the letters in the Siksa
and the Pratisakhya works and
Patafijali has advised its inclusion
in the alphabet. As visarga
cannot be found in use indepen-
dently of another letter (which is
any vowel after which it occurs)
it is called अयोगवाहृ.
विसर्जनीय same as विसर्ग which see
above; cf. विसृज्यते पुनर्वर्णनं संबध्यते इति
विसर्गः; Durgasirhha on Kat. I. 1.
16. The term विसृष्टे is also used
in the same sense. The visar-
janiya has the same position (स्थान)
in the mouth as the vowel after
which it occurs. It is a glottal
sound; the Rk-Prtisakhya says
that some scholars describe visar-
janya as a chest sound: cf. कण्ठथी-
कार:प्रथमपञ्चमौ च द्वादूष्माणौ केचिदेताबुरस्यौ |
R. Pr. I 18: cf. also उरसि विसर्जनीये
वा R. T. 3.
वेिस्टट the same as Wisarjaniya or
Visarga, which see above.
विस्थान belonging to a position of ut-
terance (स्थान) other than the one
assigned,or referred to; cf. विस्थान
स्पर्श उदये मकार, R. Pr. IW. 3.
विस्पष्ट clear and correct; the term
is used in connection with the
pronunciation of Vedic words; cf.
येथे एतत् | ] अविस्पष्टार्था भवन्तीति Nir.
I. 16.
विस्पष्टादि a class of words headed by
the word विस्पष्ट which retain their
own accents in a compound when
they are the first members of a
compound, provided that any word
of quality is the second member
e. g. विस्पष्टकदुक्रम् | ब्यक्तलवणम् where
the words र्विस्पष्ट and ब्यक्त are used
in the sense of clear, referring
to the different tastes; cf. K8. On
P. WI. 2. 24.

वेस्वर
-338
बु
_
विस्वर characterized by a faulty or | डक्र (!) augment इ added (a) to the
incorrect accent, which is looked
upon as a fault of pronunciation.
विहार expansion of the position
( स्थान ) and the means of utter-
ance ( करण ) of a sound beyond
the necessary extent, which pro-
duces a fault of pronunciation,
called व्यास; cf. विहृारसंहृारयेार्यासपडने !
" स्थानक्ररणयोर्विहृ्र विस्तरे व्यासो नाम दार्षे
जायते Uvvata on R. Pr. XIV 2.
विद्धत prescribed by a rule: that for
which a vidhi or injunction has
been laid down. The word is
very frequently used by gram-
marians with respect to an affix
prescribed after a base.
विहितविशेषण an adjectival word gen-
erally in a different case from that
of the word to which it is applied
as an adjective, and hence, trans-
lated as prescribed after' and not
as * belonging to ' cf. विहितविशेषणं
धातुग्रहृणम् / धातीय बिहुित इति | M. Bh.
on P. I. 1.5 Vart 3: cf. also M.
Bh. on II.4. 74. Vart 1.
वीप्सा complete application to all
the different parts comprehensive
inclusion of every part or unit:
desire to occupy completely: cf.
ब्यात्षविषया प्रयेश्ाक्तुरिच्छा वप्सिा नानावा- |
' चिन्तामधिकरणानां क्रियागुणाभ्यां युगपत्प्रयोक्तुक्य-
तुग्र्योप्तुमिच्छा नानाभूतार्थवााचनं द्वाद्वानां यन्यि-
धिकरणानि वाच्यानि तेषां क्रियागुणाभ्यां युगपत्प्रये-
' क्किमच्छा वासा:e.g. ग्रामे ग्राभेारमणीयः .
Kis on P.VIII.1.4. For details
see Mahabhasya on P.VIII. 1.1
,, and 4, . ' ,
ड general term for the augment बुक्
" hd the afixesबुक्, बुच्, बुञ् and बुन्
After the indicatoryletterhas dis
appeared the remnant बु of the
affixes and not of the augment, is
always changed into अक: cf. युवे-
P. WII.1.].
word भ्र after it, when the tad.
affix ढ ( एय ) in the sense of
अपत्य is affixed to it; cf. भुवे बुक् च
''. IV. 1.125; (b) to the root g
before an affix ' beginning with a
vowel in the perfect and the aorist
tenses; e.g. बभूव, अभूवन् etc.: cf.
P. VI. 4.88: (c) to the root सू in
the Perfect third pers. sing.; 'c.g.
ससूव, P.VII.+74; (2) tad. affix अक्र
applied to the word कन्था as seen
in use in the Bannu ( वर्ण ) dis-
trict: e. g. क्रान्थकम् , cf. P.IV.2.103.
डेढ tad. affix अश्क applied optionally
with the affixes घ and इल to the
preposition उप when the whole
word is used as the name ofa man
e.g. उपक्र:; cf. Kas. on P. V. 3.80.
डू (ID tad. affix अक्र causing vrddhi
to the vowel of the first sylla-
ble of that word to which it
is added, as prescribed, (a) to
the words denoting an offspring
as also to the words उक्ष, उष्ट् etc.in
the sense of a group'; c. g.
अोपगवक्रम् , औष्ट्कम् , कैदारकम् etc.: cf.
P.IV.2.39, 40; (b) to the words
राजन्य and others in the sense of
*inhabited country' ; e. g. राजन्यक्र:
देवनाथक: ctc., cf. P. IV.2.53, (c)
to the words headcd by अरीहृण
such as दुघण, खदिर्, मैत्रायण, काशकृत्स्न
etc. in the quadruple senses; c. g.
अारीहृणक्रम् , द्रवणकम् , cf. P. IV.2.80,
(d) to the word धन्व्र meaning a
desert, to words with य् or k for
thcir penultimate, to words end-
ing in प्रथ, पुर and वद् as also to
words headed by धूम, नगर, अरण्य
· कुरु, युगन्धर etc., under certain condi-
. tions in the uniscellaneous senscs;
. e. g. सांकथ्यक:,. पाटलिपुत्रक्र:, माक्रन्दक:,
आङ्गक:, वाक:, धेमकः, नगरक्र:, अारण्यक:
etc.; cf. P. IV.2.121-130,134,135,
136; (e) to thc words दरद् , आश्वयुजी,
ग्रीष्म, वसन्त, संवत्सर,अाग्रहृायणी and others

बुन्
in the specific senses given: cf. P.
IV. 3.27, 45, 46, 49, 50; (f) to
words denoting descendence or
spiritual relation, words meaning
families and warrior clans, words
कुलाल and others, words meaning
clans, and studentslearning aspeci-
fic Vedic branch in specific senses
prescribed : e. g. आचार्यक, मातामह्यक,
ग्लेबुक्रयनक्र, कलाळक, काठक्र, क्रांछीपक
etc.: cf. P. IV. 3.77, 99, 118,
126; (g) to the words ढाक्रळ, उष्ट्,
उमां and ऊर्णा in the specially given
senses; e.g. ढाकछः, संधेः, ओट्कं:, अभम्
अर्जम्, cf.P.IV.3.188,157,158; (h) to
words with य् as the penultimate,
and a long vowel preceding the
last one, to words in the dvandva
compound, and to the words सनेज्ञ,
कल्याण and others in the sense of
*nature or profession':e.gरामणीयकम्
गोपालपशुपालका, गार्हीक्र, क्राठिका <tc : cf.
P. V.1.132,133, 134: (2) krt affix
अक added to the roots ानन्द् हिंस् and
others, and to the roots द्व् and कृट्
with a prefix before,it the sense of
a habituated,professional or skilled
agent: e.g.. निन्दक:, परिक्षेपक्र:, असूयकः,
परिदेवक:, अक्राळक:: etc. cf. P.III.2.
146, 147. _
डन (l) krt.affix अक्र added to the rools
धु, सृ, and ， in the sense of askill-
ed agent' and to any root in the
sense of an agent who is blessed'; |.
e.g. प्रबक:, सरकः, लवकः, जोधकः
( meaning जीवतत् ) नन्दक्र:, ( mean-
ing नन्दतात् ); cf. P. III. 1. 149,
, 150; (2) tad. affix अक्र added to(a)
the words क्रम and others in the
sense of " a student of '; e.g, क्रमक्र:, |
वृच्त (1) arrived at oraccomplished, as
पदक्रः शिक्षकः मीमांसक:: cf. P.. IV.2.61:
" (b) the words पूर्वीहृ, अपराहृ etc. as
also the words पथिन् and अम|त्राख्या in
the sense of produccd in': e.g.
वृ क् ,पन्थक, अमावास्यक: cf. P. IV.3.
28, 49, 30; (c) the words कलापि,
339
वृत्त
*debt paid at the time of ', the
words वासुदेव and अर्जुन in the sense of
*devoted to',and the dvandva com-
pounds when the words so formed
mean either *enmity' or *nuptial
ties':e.g. कलापकम् (ऋणम्),यवकम् (ऋणम्)
वासुदवकः, अर्जुनकः, कार्कीलक्रिक्रा, कुत्सकु-
श्ािाकक्रा: cf.P.IV.3.48, 98,125: (d) the
words गीषद्, ईषत्च etc. in the sense
of*containing or "possessing', and
the word पाथन् in the sense of ex-
pert* e.g. इषेत्वकः, पथक:: cf.P.V.2.62,
03; and (e) the words पद् and शतं
preceded by a :mumeral, in the
sense of चप्सिा, as also in the senses
of दण्ड (fine) and व्यवसर्ग when those
words are prcceded by a nume-
ral; e.g. द्विपादेकां ( ददाति ), द्विशतिकां
( ददाति ), द्विपदिकां दाडित:: cf. KS. on
P. V.4.l and 2.
वृत् a word signifying the end of a
particular group of words; the
word frequently occurs in the
Dhtupitha of Panini but not nece-
ssarily at the end of each classor
group therein: e.g. दृक्षेIाव गातेवृद्धर्योः
वृत् | अयं वदातेश्र उद्रतै परस्मैभाषौ | Dhatu-
pha at the end of the First
Conjugation. Similarly ，त् is used
at the end of the fourth, fifth, and
sixth conjugations. __
वृतादे a class of roots headed by the
root वृत् which take optionally the
Parasmaipada affixes when the
vikarana स्य of the future tense and
the conditional mood, or the
desiderative vikarana सन् is added
to them; c.g. वत्स्यैति,.बर्तिष्य्ते; अवत्थिर्यत्,
अबार्तष्येत,: र्विवृत्संति, विवर्तितं cf Ks.
on P.I. 3.92; cf.also P. WII. 2.59.
a result ofवृत्ति which means afurther
grammatical formation from a
noun.or a verb; resultart from a
vrtti: cf यावृतां कामचारो ' वृतस्य
'----! लिङ्गसंख्ये त अतिंदेक्ष्यते, न पुन्:; प्रावृतैर्य
अथेत्थ, यव and बुस in the sense \.
M Bh. on PI.2.51; cf also युक्तं

वृत्ति
पुनर्यद् वृत्तनिमित्तको नाम अनुबन्धः स्युात्; (2) |
employment, the same as प्रयेग, cf.
वृत्ताद्वा ' वृत्तं प्रयेागः	Pradipa on P. I.
3.9: (3)behaviour, treatment cf.
नकारस्योष्मवद् वृत्ते R. Pr. X.13; (4)
manner of Veda writing, metrical
form, metre; cf. तद् वृत्ते प्राहुश्छन्दसाम्
R. Pr. XVII.22.
वृत्ति (1) treatment, practice of pro-
nunciation; (2) conversion of one
phonetic element into another; cf.
R.Pr.I.95:(3) position of the padas
or words as they stand in the Sarh-
hita text, the word is often seen |
used in this way in the compound
word पदवृति; आन्पदा: पदवृत्तयः R.Pr.
IV.17: (4) modes of recital of the
Vedic text which are described to
be three दुत, मध्य and विलम्बित based
upon the time of the interval and
the pronunciation which differs
in each one; cf. M. Bh. on P. I.4.
109, Vart. 4; also I. .69 Wart.l l ;
( 5 ) nature cf. गुर्वक्षराणां गुरुवृत्ति सर्वम्
R.Pr.XVIII.33; (6) interpretation
ofa word; (7) verbal or nominal ]
form of a root; cf. अथनित्यः परीक्षेत |
केनचिद् वृत्तिसामान्यन Nir. II.1: (8)mode |
or treatment followed by a scienti-
fic treatise; cf का पुनर्वति
शास्त्रप्रवृात: | M.Bh. in Ahnika l Ton !
वृत्तिसमवायार्थे उपदेशा: Vartttika 10: (9) |
manner of interpretation with the |
literal sense of the constituents
present or absent, described usual- !
ly as two-fold जहृत्स्वार्था and अजहृत्स्वार्था, |
but with a third kind added by
some grammarians viz. the
जहृदजहृत्स्वार्था: (I0) a compound
word giving an aggregate sense
different from the exact literal
sense of the constituent words:
there are mentioned five vrittis of
this kind; cf. पराथीभधानं वृत्तिः कृत्तद्वि-
तसुमासैकदेशधातुरूपाः पञ्च वृत्तयः | वृत्त्यर्था-
वबोधकं वाक्यं विग्रहुः S. K.Tat the end
of the Ekasesaprakarana; ( 11 )
340
वृत्तिदीपिका
interpretation of a collection
of statements; the word was
originally applied to glosses or
comments on the ancient works
like the Stitra works, in which
the interpretation of the text was
given with examples and counter-
examples where necessary: cf. वृत्तौ
भाष्ये तथा नामधातुपारायणादिषु: introduc-
tory stanza in the Kasika.Later on,
when many commentary works
were written,the word वृत्ति was dif-
erentiated from भाष्य, वार्तिक, टीक,तूर्ण,
नियुक्ति, टिप्पणी, पाञ्जक्रा and others, and
made applicable to commentary
works concerned with the expla-
nation of the rules with examples
and counter-examples and such
statements or arguments as were
necessary for the explanation of
the rules or the examples and
counter examples. In the Vyakara-
aa-Sastra the word occurs almost ex-
clusively used for the learned Vrtti
on Paini-stºtras by Vamana and
Jayaditya which was given the
name Kasika Vrtti; cf. तथा च
वृत्तिकृत् often occurring in works on
Pahimi's grammar.
ः । वृत्तिः | वृत्तिग्रन्थ commentary works of the
type of Wrtti, which see above;
cf. तथा च वृत्तिग्रन्थधूपलभ्यते.
_
वृतिचन्द्रिका name ofa grammar work
written by a grammarian Kasi-
natha who also is believed to
have written वर्णविवेकवान्द्रका and
वैयाकरणसर्वस्व.
वृत्तित्रयवार्तिक a very short work in
verse-form explaining in a very
general manner the nature of
Sutras and Varttikas the work
is anonymous.
a treatise on the different
ways in which the meaning is
conveyed by words according to
the conventions of grammarians,

वृत्तिपक्ष 341
written by a grammarian Krsha-
bhatta surnamed MaunI.
वृतिपक्ष the alternative method of
speaking by the use of compound
words as contrasted with simple
words; both the methods are
observed in use among the people:
cf इह द्वौ पक्षे वृत्तिपक्षश्रावृत्तिपक्षश्च स्वभाव-
तचैतद् भवति वाक्यं च समासश्च । M.Bh.on
P.II.1.l,II.1.51, III.1.7,IV.1. 82. !
वृत्तिपरिगणन a definite enumeration !
ofwords used in a specificsense (as
contrasted with वातंपारेगणन) which
means a definite enumeration of
the senses in which an operation,
such as a compound-formation or
so, takes place; cf. अथैतस्मिन्सति अन-
भिधाने यदि वृतिपरिगणनं क्रियते,वर्तिपरिगणनमपि
कर्तव्यम् ; cf M. Bh. on P. II. 2.24
Vart. 16.
वृतिसंसश्रदृ name of a gloss on Fanini's
Astadhyayi written by Rama-
candra.
वृत्तिसमवाय serial arrangement of|
letters in a specific way ( as for
instance in the Mahesvara Sutras)
for the sake of grammatical fun- |
ctions: cf. वृतिर्मयायार्थं उपेदुशः | वृत्तिः |
शास्त्रप्रवृतः सर्मवाये वर्णानामानुपूर्व्येण संनिवेशः |
M. Bh. on Ahnika I.
वृत्तिसमुद्दा name given to the last of
वृद्धिप,द
ऋद्ध (I) a term used in Paninis gra-
mmar for such words or nouns
( प्रातिपदिक ) which have for their
first vowel a vrddhi vowel, i. e.
either अा or u or अौ: e.g. इnला, माला
etc.: cf. वृद्धिर्यस्य अचामादिस्तद् वृद्धम् ;
(2) a term applied to the eight
pronouns headed by त्यत् for pur-
poses of the addition of tad. affixes
prescribed for the Vrddha words,
such as छ by वृद्धाच्छ: P. IV.2.114:
(3) a term applied to words having
ए or ओी as the first vowel in them,
provided such words denote dis-
tricts of Eastern India, e. g. गोनर्द,
भोजकट etc. cf. एङ् प्राचां देशे, P.I.1.73,
74 and 75; (4) a term used in the
Pratisakhya works for a protracted
vowel ( प्ठत ) which has three
mitrs; cf तिखे वृद्धम् R. T.44.
| वृद्धि (1) a technical term used by
Panini to denote the vowels अा, ए
and औ: a vowel belonging to
the third grade out of the three
grades of vowels which are
known as 2ero, normal and long
grades; cf , वृद्धिरादैच् P I. 1.1: (2)
lengthening completely of a vowel
which is called प्|ृति in grammar:
the term is used in the Rk Tantra
Pratisakhya in this scnse.
thefbirteen sections of the third | वृद्धिनिमित्त lit cause of Vrddhi (वृद्धेर्नि-
chapter of Bhartphari's Vakya- !
padya ( viz. the संक्रीर्णकाण्ड ) in |
which the taddhita affixes and |
their interpretations are discussed. ]
वृत्तिस्त्र a rule forming the basis of
a wrtti, i. e. a rulc on which
glosses are written, as contrasted
with वार्तिकसूत्र or वार्तिक a pithy
Sutralike statement composed as
an addition or a modification of !
the original Sutra; cf. केचित्ताव-
दाहुर्यद् वृत्तिसूत्रे इति | संख्ययाव्ययासन्नादूराधि-
कसंख्यां: संखेयंय ( P. II. 2.25 ) इति |
M, Bh. on P. II. 2. 24,
मित्तम्)such as the employment of
the indicatory letter ञ्ज or ण् in an
affix or the lettter क् in tad.affixes;
the term is, however, found used
in the sense of having in it a
cause of Vrddhi, i.e. an indicatory
letter ञ्ज, णु or क्.; cf वृद्धिनिमित्तस्य च
तद्धितस्यारक्तावेकार P. VI. 3.39. cf.
वृद्धेर्निमित्तं यस्मिन्स वृद्धिनिमित्त: M. Bh.
on P. I. I..
वृद्धिपाद् name given to the first pada
of Panini's Astdhyay by gramm-
arians, as the beginning of the
pada is made by the Sutra वृद्धिरादैच्

वृषन्
342
वेदेिक
वृषन् ( वृषा ), a term used in ancient
grammar works for a word of the
fmasculine gender as contrasted
with येषा.
वृषदि a class of words headed by
the word वृष which have their
initial vowel accented acute: cf.
KaS, on P. WI.1.203.
ए tad.affix अण् prescribed by the
sutra ऋष्यन्धकवृष्णिकुरुभ्यश्च after words
denoting members of the Vsn
race: cf. वृष्ण्यणेाSवक्राळाः वासुदेवः · बलदेव: !
वेद् a term applicd to roots which
optionally admit the application of
the augment इ (इट्) to the Ardha-
dhatuka affixes placed after them,
e. g. roots having got the indica-
tory vowel ऊ added to them
as also the roots √वृ, सू, धू and the
roots headed by रध् as also some
specifically mentioned roots under
certain conditions; cf P. VIl.
2.44-51.
वतनादि a class of words headed by
वेतन which have the taddhita
affix इक (ठक्) added to them in the
sense of "earning a livelihood' e.g.
वेतनिक्र: | धानुष्क:; दाडिक:; cf. वेतनेन
. जीवति वैतनिकः कर्मक्रर: Ks on P. IV.
4.12. _
वद language of the Vedic Literature
as contrasted with the term छेक्र;
cf. नैव लोके न च वेदे अकारो विवृतोस्ति M.
Bh. on Mhesvara Stra; cf.
also रक्षार्थं वेदानामध्ययं व्याकरणम् M.
Bh. Ahnika 1. The term वैदिक
referring to words found in Wedic
language is also frequently used
in the Mahabhasya. Panini, how-
ever, has used the term छन्दस्र, मन्त्र
and निगम,and not वेद, out of which
the first term छन्दस् is often used;
cf. बहुलं छन्दसि P. II. 4.39, 76: III,
2.88: V. 2.122: or छन्दसि च P. V.
1.67, V. 4.142, VI. 3.126. VI.
l.34, WII. 1.8, etc,
वेदमित्र an ancient writer of a Pra-
tiSikhya work mentioned in the
Rk Prtikhya.
वेबर् [ WEBER, ALBRECHT of
Berlin, 1825-190l ] a sound scho-
lar of Vedic Literature who has
written many articles on Sanskrit
Grammar in *Indische Studien.**
वेष्टक lif. enclosure or envelope; the
term is used in the sense of परिग्रहं
with reference to the repetition
of one and the same word more
than once in the Kratma and
other artificial recitals; cf. परिग्रहं
त्वनार्षीन्तात् तेन वैक्राक्षरीक्तात् | परषां न्यास-
मान्वारं, व्याळिस्र्तो चत् स्वरौ परौ |on which
Uvvata remarks परिग्रहं वटके.
वेकल्पिक 1it. optional, voluntary; the
term is used in connection with
a rule or operation ' prescribed
alternatively with another, where
there is an option to apply any
one of the two and arrive at two
forms in the same sense;.
वैकृत lit. subjected to modifications;
which have undergone a change;
the term, as contrasted with प्रकृत,
refers to letters which are noticed
in the Sarhhitpatha and not in
the Padapa:ha. The change of
अस् into ओ, or of the consonant त्
into द् before soft letters, as also
the insertion of त् between त् and
स् etc. are given as instances. cf.
वैकृताः च पदपाठे अदृशः | यथा प्रथमास्तृती-
यभूता:, अन्त:पाता: इत्येवमादयः
S c -
वैचिच्याथे simply for the sake of
variety without any specific pur-
pose in view; cf. वषड्ग्रहृणे वेत्रिन्यांर्थम् !
द्विचित्रा हि सूत्रस्य वृति: पागेन: | Kas, on
P. I. 2.35 cl: also Kis. on P. III.
3.96, IV. 1.148, 168, 160.
वेद्विक्र found in Vedic Literature; the
term is used in contrast with
लेीक्रिक which means * found ， in
commmon use : cf. यथा लोक्रऋवैदिकेषु

वेद्विकीप्राया
84%
वैयाकरणभूषण
M. Bh. Ahnika 1. kaiyata ex-
plains वैदिक as श्रुत्युपानबद्ध.
वेदिकोप्रक्रिया name of that section
of Bha!toji's Siddhintakaumudi
which deals with Vedic peculia-
rities noticed by Panini in his
stitras. Thcre is a well-known
commentary upon this section
named सुवेधिनीं written by Jaya-
krsha a famous grammar scholar of
the Maunin family.
वेदिकप्रक्रियाटीका (l) a commentary
on the sutras of Panini dealing
with the Wedic words and their
peculiarities written by a gram-
marian named Murri; (2) a com-
mentary on the section of Bha-
toj's Siddhantakaumudi named
वैदिकीप्रक्रिया written by Jayaksha
Maunin and named Subodhini.
वैद्यनाथ, Vaidyanatha Payagunde, a
famous grammarian of the eigh-
teenth century, who was one of
the chief pupils of Nagesa and
who prepared a line of pupils at
Varanas. He has written learned
commentaries on standard works
om grammar, the principal ones
being the Prabh ou the Sabda-
kaustubha, the BhavaprakSik
on the Brhaccabdendusekhara,
the Cidasthimal on the Laghu-
Sabdendusekhara, the Ksiki or
Gada on the Paribhasendusekhara |
and an independent short treatise
named Rapratyaya-khandana-
वेभक्त belonging to a case-affix; cf.
क्राभ्यां से वैभेक्तः ( मूर्धन्यमापद्यते )	ऋक्षु
बणिक्षु	cf. also वैभक्तस्य णत्वे P. VI.
1.85 Varttika 6.
वैभाषिक optional, alternative.cfः चत
वैभाषिक:'T. Pr.XXII. 7; seeवैक्रजििक्र.
वैयाधिकरण्य Iit. possession of separate
residences, as contrasted with सामा-
नाधिकरण्य: absence of apposition; use
in different cases non-agreement
in case.
वैयथ्र्यं absence of any purpose or
utility; the word is used many
times in the case of a rule, or a
word or two of it, in whose case
वैयथ्र्य or absence of utility is shown,
and, with a view to prevent its
being looked upon as a serious
fault, something is deduced and
the purpose is.shown; cf सूत्रवैयथ्र्य-
प्रसङ्गात् and व्यर्थं सज्ज्ञापयति used in
grammar treatises,
वैयाकरण lit. a student of grammar;
ब्याकरणमधीते वैयाकरण: cf KS. on P.
IV, 2.59. The word is used in
the sense of ' a scholar of Gram-
mar;' or, *a person who has obtain-
ed proficiency in Grammar.' The
word is used several times in this
sense in the Mahabhasya. cf M.
Bh. on P. I. 1.3; I.4.2, II. 1.53,
II.2.29, II.3.18, II.4.56, III.2.115
etc. The word is also used in the
sense of* pertaining to grammar'
or found in grammar.'
वैयाकरणर्जीवातु a term used for the
gramrnar treatise written by Can-
gudasa which is also called Cah-
gustºtra or Cifguvyakarana.
वैयाकरणभूषण a well-known work on
the grammatical interpretation
of words written by Koadabhatta
asan explanatory work (ब्याख्यान) on
the small work in verse consisting
of only 72 Kriks written by his
uncle Bhattoji Diksita. The trea-
tise is also named Bghadvaiy-
karanabhuisana. ' A smaller work
consisting of the same subject-
matter but omitting discussions,
is written by the author for faci-
litating the understanding of
students to which he has given
the name Watyakarahabhtisana-
sra. This latter work has got
three commentary works written

वैयाकरणभूषणसार
344
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तक्षेमु ू
on it named Kasiki, Knti and
Matonmaj and one more scho*
larly one Sahkari, recently written
by Shankar Shastri Marulkar.
SN - -
वेयाकरणभूषणसार a slightly abridged
form of the Vaiyakaraabhisa?a by
the author Kondabhatta himself
for students and beginncrs. It
consists of the same number of
fourteen chapters as the main
treatise, which are given the name
Nirnaya. See Waiyākarahabhisana.
वैयाकरणभूषणसारटीका a commentary
written on the well-known work
on the sense of words and syntax
written by Kondabhatta There
are many commentaries out of
which, the well-known ones are
(1) Darpan by Harivallabha, (2)
Laghubhusaakanti by Gopala-
deva, a pupil of Balarhbhatta
Payagunde, and (3) Kasika , by
Harirama Kesava Kale and Sah-
kari by Sankarasastrº | Marula-
kara,
वैयाकरणभूषणसारवृत्ति a commentary
on the Waiyākaranabhisapa,
written by Mahānanda in the
beginning of the nineteenth
century.
वैयाकरणशाब्दमाला, वैयाकरणशब्दरत्नमाला a
treatise on the use of words written
as a helpful guide to Sanskrit
writers, by a grammarian named
Somayajin in 1848 A.D.
वैयाकरणशाब्दबोध import of a sentence
according to the grammarians, in
which verbal activity occupies a
predominant place, and the resid-
ing place of the subject as also that
of the verbal activity is identical
in the active voice, while the
object and the verbal activity have
got the same place of residence in
the passive voice. The other
auxiliaries of activity such as the
instrument, location and the like,
are connected with the verba!
activity. The import of the
sentence चैत्रः पचति, in short, can be
expressed as चैत्रक्रधृका वर्तमानकालेकां
पाकक्रिया.
वैयाकरणसर्वस्व a small treatise on
grammar written by a scholar of
grammar named Ksinatha who
has also written a few more small
works बर्णविवक्रचान्द्रका, वृतिचन्द्रिका, धातुम-
ज्ञरू etc.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तकारिका a very scho-
larly work by Bhattoj Diksita
on the interpretation of words
and sentences, based upon the
learned discussions on that subject
introduced in the Mahbhagya,
Vakyapadiya, Pradipa , etc. and
discussed fully in his Sabdakau-
stubha by the author himself.
The work although scholarly
and valuable, is compressed in
only .72 verses ( krikas ) and
has to be understood with the
help of the Waiyakaranabhisana
or BhपेSansara written by Konda-
bhatta, the nephew of the author.
See वैयाकरणभूषणand वैयाकरणभूषणसार.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तकैमुदी an extremely
popular work on the subject of
Sanskrit grammar written for the
use of students, which, although
difficult at a few places, enables
the students by its careful study
to get a command over the subject
. and enablehim to read other higher
works on grammar. The work is
based on the Astadhyay of Panini
without omitting a single Stra.
The arrangement of the Sutras is,
entirely different, as the author,for
the sake of facility in understand-
ing, has divided the work into
different topics and explained the
Sutras required for the topic by

वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तकौमुर्दीटीका
345 वेषाथक
bringing them together in the
topic. The main topics or Praka-
ranas are twelve in number, wix.
( 1 ) संज्ञापरिभाषा, ( 2 ) पञ्चसंधि, ( 3 )
सुबन्त or षड्ळङ्ग, (4) खत्रीप्रत्यय, (5) कारक,
(6) समास, (7) ताद्धत, (8) तिडन्त, (9)
प्रक्रिया, (10) कृदन्त,(11) वैदिकी and (12)
स्वर which are sometimes styled as
व्याकरणद्वादशी. The work is generally
known by the term सिद्धान्तकौमुदी, or
even क्रौमुदी, and it has got a large
number ofscholarly and ordinary
commentaries as also commentari-
es on commentaries,all numbering
above twelve, and twoabridgments
the Madhyakaumud and the
Laghukaumudi. The work was
written by the reputed scholar
Bhattoj Diksita of Varanas in the
seventeenth century. See Bhagoj
Diksita.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तकौमुदीटीका or सिद्धान्त-
कौमुदीव्याख्या a general name given
to the large number of commen-
taries written by members of the
line of pupils, and pupils of pupils
of Bhattoji. The well-known among
the commentaries are प्रौढमनेरमा by
the author himself, तत्त्वबोधिनी by
ज्ञानेन्द्रसरस्वती, सुबोधिनी by जयकृष्णभट्ट मैौनी
बालमनेरमा by वासुदेवदीक्षित, and crown-
ing all, the लघुशब्देन्दुशेखर by नागेशभट्ट.
Theप्रौढमनेीरमाhas got a learned com-
mentary written by इरिदीक्षित called
लघुशब्दरत्न or शब्दरत्न, which also has
on it commentaries named भावप्रक्रादा
by बालेभट्ट and शब्दरतदीप by कल्याणमल्छ.
The Laghusabdendusekhara has
got commentaries reaching about
ten in number.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तभूषण the same as
वैयाकरणभूषण, which see above. .
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तमञ्जूषा a well-known
work on the syntax and denota-
tion of words written by Nigesa-
bhatta which is popular by the
44
name LaghumafijusB. The Para-
malaghumafijtis is an abridgment
of this work by the author him-
self.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तरत्नाकर name of a
commentary on the Siddhanta-
kaumudi by Ramakrsina in the
latter half of the seventeenth
century.
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तरहृस्य name of a co-
mmentary on the Siddhanta-
kaumud by Nilakantha.
वैयाघ्रपद्य name of a treatise of gra-
mmar written in ten chapters
by an ancient grammarian ढयाघ्रपाद्:
cf दाकं वैयाघ्रपद्यम् Kas.on P. IV 2.65.
For details, see Vyakaragamah3-
bhasya Vol. VII. D. E. Society's
SN Ed. pp. 133, 134.
वेवचन a term used for the Pragrhya
vowel, possibly the same as दैबचन ,
which means a specific feature of
द्विवचन or the dual number. The
, term is used in some Siks works.
वेव्मित name given to the svarita or
circumflex accent on the vowel
following upon a vowel accented
acute, when there is a vivrtti or
.pause between the two vowels;
e.g, य इन्द्रः: cf वैवृत्ततैरेब्यञ्जनो क्षेप्राभि-
,निहितौ च तालु | R. Pr. III. 10.
वैशिष्टय specific feature, peculiarity.
वेशेष्य special differentiating feature;
cf. अनुप्रदानत्संसर्गात् स्थानात् करणावन्ययात् !
जायते वर्णवेशेष्यं परीमाणल्व पञ्चमात् | T.Pr.
XXIII. 2.
वैषम्य diversity in number or pro-
rties; cf. एवमपि पञ्चागमाख्त्रय् अागमिनः
त्संख्यातानुदेशो न भवति M. Bh.
Ahnika 1; cf. also M. Bh. on P.I.
2, 27, I. 3. 10 Vart. 4, I. 4.101. *
वेषाथक (1) pertaining to the word
विषय in the sutra विषयो देशे P. IV.2.
52; the term refers to the tad.
affixes prescribed in the sense
of * country ' or *district' (विषेय) in

व्यक्तं ; 346
व्यतिकर
P. IV. 2.52-54 as contrasted with |
नैवासिक affixes prescribed in the
sense of * inhabited district ' by P. |
IV. 2.69-80 (2) one of the three
senses of the locative case, viz. the |
. sense * substratum ' of the locative
case, which is not physical जे |
which is a topical one, forming |
an object or aim of an , action as ]
specified by the word * about ' |
cf. अाधकरणं नाम त्रिप्रकारं ब्यापक्रमैपश्छात्रकं
वैषयिकमिति |
व्यक्त distinctly perceived i e. ]
perceived with reference to the
individual referred to, which en-
ables the speaker to apply the
specific affixes in the sense of
gender and number;	cf त्रीतिपादकं
चाप्युपादेयं सामान्यभूतेर्थे वर्तते | सामान्य
वर्तमानस्य व्यक्तिरुपजायत | ब्यक्तस्य सते
लिङ्गसंख्याभ्यामन्वितस्य बाह्यनांथन येोगे भक्त !
M.Bh. on P.I.1.57.
व्यक्ति (l) lit.distinct manifestation, as
for instance that of the generic
features in the individual object;
cf.सामान्य वर्तमानस्य ब्याक्तिरुपजायत, M.Bh.
on P.I.1,57; (2) gender, which in
fact,is the symbol of the manifesta-
tion of the generic property in the
individual object;cf.हृरीतक्यादिषु ब्यक्ति:
P.I.2.52 Vart. 3, as also ठपि युक्तवद्
|
I
I
व्यक्तिवचने P. I.2.5I: (3) individual
object;cf. ब्यक्तिः पदार्थ:.
ब्यातपदार्थवाद् the same as द्रव्यपदार्थवाद;
the view that a word denotes the
individual object and not the
generic nature. The oldest gra-
mmarian referred to as holding
this view, is ब्याडि who preceded
Patajali.
व्यङ्कटसुब्बाश्ाास्री a grammarian who
has written a grammar treatise
named भाषामञ्जरीव्याकरण.
व्यङ्गघ (1) suggested sense as contrast-
ed with the denoted sense; (2) the
supreme or ultimate suggested
sense viz. Sphota which is the
ultimate sense of every sentence.
व्यञ्जन a consonant; that which mani-
fests itself in the presence ofa vowel,
being incapable of standing alone;
cf.न.पुनरन्तरेणाच ब्यञ्जनस्येीचारणमपि भबात !
अन्वर्थखल्वाप निर्वचनम् ， स्वयं राजन्त स्वराः
अन्वक् भवति ब्यञ्जनम् l M.Bh.on I.2.30;
cf. also अथवा गतिरपि ब्यञ्जेरर्थ: । विविधे
गच्छत्यजुपरागवशादिति व्यञ्जनम् | उपरागश्च
पूर्वपराच्संनिधानपि परेणाचा भवतिं न पूर्वेण |
Kaiyata on P. I. 2. 30; cf. ब्यञ्जनं
स्वराङ्गम् T.Pr.I.6; cf. also ब्यञ्जनसमु-
दायस्तु स्वरसंनिहृित एव अक्षरं भवति	Uv-
vata Bhasya on V. Pr.. III.45.
व्यञ्जनसंधि a junction or coalescence
of two consonants as distinguished
from स्वरसंधि. In Panini's system of
grammar the name हृल्संधि is given
to व्यञ्जनसंधि and the Siddhinta-
kaumud has given a separate sec-
tion for it.
व्यञ्जनसेनिपात or संयेाग, conjunction or
falling together of two consonants;
cf. हृलोनन्तराः संयेगाः P.I.I. 7.
व्यञ्जनाविद्यमानवद्भाव consideration of
a consonant being not present as
far as the accentuation of a vowel
is concerned,the vowel being look-
ed upon as the initial or the final,
irrespective of the consonant .or
consonants respectively preceding
it, or following it; cf. 1्वरविधौ व्यञ्जन-
मधिद्यमानवद् भवति Par. Sek. Pari. 79.
व्यत् tad. affix कय added to the word
भ्रातृ in the sense of अपत्य,e.g. भातृव्य:;
cf. P.IV.1. 144.
व्यतिकर (1) confusion of one number-
affix for another number-affix
(वचन), as noticed in the statements.
e. g. अक्षीणि म दर्शनीयानि: पादा म सुकुमा-
रंतरा: M. Bh. on P.I. 4. 21; (2) any
confusion, say confusion of one
grammatical element for another;
cf. हृि: परस्मैपदानां यथा स्यात्, स्व आत्मन-
पदानां, व्यतिक्रूरो मा भूत् M. Bh. on P.

व्यतिरिक्त 347
_
व्यपंक्षा
IIH.4.1 Wrt, 2.
व्यतिरिक्त distinct from, separate from,
cf. कर्मादिभ्येान्य: प्रातिपदिकार्थव्यतिरिक्तः
स्वस्वामिसंबन्धादिःइष: | Ks. on P.II. 3.
50.
व्यतिरेक (1) surplus, excess; (2) sepa-
rate presence; (3) contrary thing:
cf. तत्र फलव्यतिरेकेापि स्यात् / M. Bh. on
Ahnika 1.
व्यतिषङ्ग reciprocal junction or conne-
ction; cf. हृल्वानुस्वारव्यतिषङ्गवत् पर:R.Pr.
XIII.16.
व्यतिहार exchange of activity; cf. कर्तरि
कर्मव्यतिहृर P.I.3.14.
व्यत्यय occurrence of one for anothers
transposition: cf. सुनेिडुपग्रहृ ... व्यत्यय-
भिच्छति इ|ास्त्रकृदेषां ... M. Bh. on P.III.
1.85. See विपर्यय.
व्यथन alteration of a phonetic ele-
ment; change of sound; mispro-
nunciation; cf. तदापाय्व्यथनानि दोषा:
R.Pr,XIW, 1.
व्यधिकरण characterized by different
case-relations or case-affixes;
possessed of different case-affixes;
के: प्रसङ्गो यद् व्यधिकरणानां समासः स्यात् M.
Bh. on P. II. 1.67.
व्यन् tad. affix य causing the acute
accent for the first vowel of the
word,added to the word भ्रातृ when
the sense of the word so formed,
is enemy'; see यत् above: cf. P.IV
1.145.
व्यपकर्षे exception to a rule; cf. क्रिमिदं
व्यपकर्षविज्ञानाादेते | अपत्रादधिज्ञानात् M.Bh.
on P.VIII.4.61 Vart 4.
व्यपदेशा (1) special designation or re-
presentation cf. अाकृतिब्र्यपदानां प्राय
आदित अादित: R. Pr. XVII. 4: ( 2 )
main designation; cf. निमित्तसद्भावाद्वि-
शिष्टोपदेशा: व्यपदज्ञा: मुख्यो व्यवहारः Par.
Sek. Pari. 30; cf. also ये द्वयेा: षष्ठी-
निर्दिष्टयेो: प्रसङ्गे भवति, लभतसै अन्यतरत
व्यपददाम्	M.Bh.onP.I.1.51 Wart. 7.
treatment of a secon-
dary thing as the principal one,
e g. a person or a thing, without
any second or any others, looked
upon as the first or the last;
cf व्यपदेशिवदेकस्मिन् कार्यं भवतीति वक्तव्यम्
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.21. Vart. 2.
The remark or expression व्यपद-
दिवद्भावेन भविष्यति is found often
given in the Mahabhasya: cf. ' M.
Bh. Ahnika 1 Wrt* 14: I.1.9,
I.1.51 I,1.72: I.2.48 etc. For de-
tails see Par. Sek. Pari. 30, ..
व्यपदेशिवद्वचन statement of Vyapade-
Sivadbhava : cf. तत्र व्यपदार्शवद्वचनम् --
एकचेी द्व प्रथमार्थं षत्वे चेदज्ञसेप्रत्ययार्थम् )
M. Bh. on VIII.3.59 Vart. 7.
व्यपवर्ग (l) division of a single thing
into its constituent elements; cf.
स्थानिवद्भावाद् व्यपवर्ग: M. Bh. on WII.
2.36, VII.3.44 Vart. 3; (2) distinct
comprehension as possessed of a
specific guality: cf न हि गेरित्युक्त
ब्यूपवर्गे गम्यंत शुद्धा नीला कपिला कपेतेति !
M.Bh, on P. I.2.64 Vart 37 ; (3)
separation into parts, cf. काश्चदे
प्रहृीरेण व्य्पबर्ग करोति, M.Bh.on V.I.119
Vart 5; (4) distinct notion as a
separate unit after the things
have been combined cf. एकादशे कृत
व्यपवर्गाभावः संबुद्धिलोपो न प्राप्नोति M. Bh.
on P. VI.1.69 Vart 3; cf. also M.
Bh. om VII.1.80.
व्यपवृक्त distinctly separated as two
or more consonantsjoined together
in a comjunct consonant, as con-
trasted with the two vowels ina
diphthong which cannot be galled
व्यपवृक्त: cf. नाब्यपवृक्तूस्यावयवे तद्विधिर्यथा
द्रव्येषु. M. Bh. on Siva Stra 3.4
V. 9. cf. also वर्णक्रद्ा: के वर्णग्रहणेन
गृह्यन्त | ये ब्यपवृक्ता अपि वर्णा भवान्त, M.
Bh. on Siva Stºtra 3,4 Wart. ll .
व्यपेक्षा mutual relationship. in sense,
as obtaining between two different
words ( पद ) connected with each
other in . a sentence, as contras-

व्यपत
348 व्यवधान
ted with compositeness ofsense as
seen in two words joined into a
compound word ( समास ) ; ब्यपेक्षा is
given as an alternative definition
of the word सामथ्यै along with
एकार्थींभाव as the other one, in the
Mahabhsya: e. g. there is व्यपेक्षां
between सर्पिः and पिब in the sen-
tence सर्पिपिब, but not in तिष्ठतु सर्पिः
पिब त्वमुद्कम्: cf. तथदमपरं दैतं भवति
एकार्थाभावे वेा सामथ्र्यं स्याद् व्यपेक्षा वेति !
M. Bh. on P. II,1.1 ; cf, also Kas.
on P, VIII.3 44.
व्यपेत having an intervention of ( a
letter, or letters or a pada); the
word is used in the same sense as
व्यवाहृत; cf. स्वापग्रहृणं व्यपेतार्यम् | व्यप-
ताथोयमारम्भः | सुष्वापायषति	M. Bh. on
P.VII.4.67.
व्यभिचार lit, deviation or discrepancy:
irregularity re: the application ofa
rule: cf.संज्ञाब्यभिचारार्थश्चकार: Kas.on P.
III.3.19;cf.also.बहुलग्रहृणं व्यभिचारार्थम्
प्रवाहिका, विवर्तिका , नव भवति । इिरोः:
KS. on P. III.3.108.
व्यभिचारिन् deviating, being irregular
in application, not applying neces-
8aily: cf अभ्रशद्वर्यं पूर्वनिपातस्य लक्षणस्य
" ब्यभिचारित्वात्.
व्यय iit.loss; disappearance the word
s used in the sense of inflectional
changes. An indeclinable is called
अन्यय because it has no infectional
changes. cf तत्कथमनुदात्तप्रकृति नाम
सः स्यात् | दृष्टव्ययं तु भवति t Nir. I.8; V.28.
व्ययवद (l) possessed of व्यय or infec-
' tional change: a declinable word;
cf यस्य पुनार्वभक्त्यादिाभार्धकारः क्रियत सं
ब्य्यवान् ' आद्युदात्त: स च अन्त:इाब्दी भवति |
W: Pr. II.26; (2) characterized by
a loss of accent i.e. the loss of th6
original accent and the presence
of another accent: cf. पदान्तेस्य पद दृ
रूरितत्वं न दृश्यते | अदृष्टमनुदात्तत्वं च दृश्यंते !
. }wwata on R. Pr, xi.31.
..य ' (l)-uscless, serving no purpose,
superfluous; the word is usually
used in the sense of uselessor futile
in connection with a rule or its
part, which serves no purpose, its
purpose or object being served
otherwise;such words or rules have
never been condemned as futile
by commentators, but an attempt
is made invariably by them to
deduce something from the futile
wording and show its necessity;cf.
व्यर्थं सज्ज्ञापयति a remark which is
often found in the commentary
literature; cf. अन्यथा अन्तरङ्गत्वाद्दीर्घ क्त
एव प्रत्ययप्राप्त्या तद्यर्थता स्पनैव	Par. Sek.
Pari. 56; (2) possessed of various
senses such as the words अक्षा: माषा:
etc.: cf. व्यर्थेषु न्व मुक्तरंदायम् \ M.Bh.on
P.I.2.64 Vart. 52. The word यथे
possibly stands for विविधार्थे in such
cases. It appears that the word
ब्यर्थ in the sense of futile was rarely
used by ancient grammarians; the
word अनर्थक appears to have been
used in its place. See Mahabhasya
in which the word ब्यर्थ does not
occur in this sense while the word
अनर्थकं occurs at several places.
व्यवच्छिन्न (1) separated; detached
from a specific thing by the loss of
connection with it; cf. एवमेतास्म-
न्नुभयतो व्यवाञ्छन यदि स्वार्थं जह्याति जहृातु
नाम M. Bh. on P. II. 1.1. Vart. 2;
(2) characterized or possessed of
an intervention by similar things
cf. तद्वा अनेकेन निपातनेन व्यवाञ्छत्रे न
शाक्यमनुवर्तयितुमिति | M. Bh. on P. III. .
3.83; cf also P. VI. 4.2.
व्यवधान (I) intervention; the word
is used in connection with the
intervention or occurrence of
letters or phonetic units between
the cause ( निमित्त ) of an operation
and the operatee (विधिभाक् ); cf लेपे
कृत नास्ति व्यवधानम् | स्थानिवद्भावंकाद् व्यवधान-
मेव | The word is used also in
the sense of intervention in , gcre-

व्यवधायक 349
क्याक्ररण
ral, which separates the two
, connected things; ब्यवधानं च भवति
वाक्य राज्ञ ऋद्धस्य पुरुषः; the word ब्यवाय
is used in the same sense; cf.
अट्कुप्वाङ्नुम्व्यवायेपि: (2) an inserted
letter or phonetic element; cf.
ब्यवधानः अन्त्यविक्ररे T, Pr. 185, 186.
व्यवधायक causing an intervention;
intervener which is required to be
of a different kind; cf अतज्जातीयकं
अयवधायकं भवति M. Bh. on P. I. 1.7.
Wart 8.
व्यवस्था lit. definite arrangement;
restriction regarding the applica-
tion of a rule, especially when it
, seems to overlap, as done by the
Warttikakara, and later on by the
.Paribhags laid down by gram-
marians regarding the rules of
Panini: cf. स्वाभिधेयापेक्षावधनियमे व्यवस्था
S. K. on P. I.1.34; cf. also लक्ष्यानु-
साराह्यवस्था Par. Sek. Pari. 99, 108. '
व्यवस्थितविभाषा an option which
does not apply universally in all
the instances of a rule which pre-
scribes an operation optionally,
but applies necessarily in : some
cases and does not apply at all
in the other cases, the total result
being an option regarding the
conduct of the rule. The rules
अजव्यैघञ्जपेो: P. II. 4.56, लट: इतृदा-
नचावप्रथमासमानाधिकरणे III. 2.124 and
वामि I. 4.5 are some of the rules
which have got an option describ-
ed as ल्यवास्थतविभाषा. The standard
instances of व्यवस्थितविभाषा are given
in the ancient verse दवत्रातो गले ग्राह्यः
इतियोगे च सद्विधिः | मिथलेत न विभाष्यन्ते
गवाक्षः संदिातत्रतः|| M. Bh,.on P, III.
3.156; WII.4.41.
व्यवहेित having an intervention by a
dissimilar thing; separated by
something coming between; cf.
संयोगसंज्ञा व्यवाहृतानां मा भूत् M. Bh. on
I.1.8. Wart, 5.: , ् !
व्यव|्य intervention, separation by
insertion , separation by means of
the insertion ofa phonetic element.
See ववृधान above. cf. अट्कुप्वाङ्नु-
म्व्यवायेपि P. VIII. 4.2: अडभ्यासव्यवेां-
यपि P. VI. 1.26: cf. अङ्कयत्राय
वाङ्कपर: R. T. 190; संयेागानां स्वरभक्त्या
व्यवायः R. Pr. XIV. 25.
व्यस्त separated into its constituent
elements separated by a new
insertion a recital of the Vedic
text by separating a coalesced
vowel, which is looked upon as a
fault ofrecital.
व्याकरण Grammar the development
of the meaning of the term can
be seen by the senses given below
in a serial order and the exam-
ples after those senses; (a) ana-
lysis or explanation by analysis;
(b) rules of explanation; (c) spe-
cific rules explaining the forma-
tion of words; (d) explanation of
the formation of rules; (e) a
treatise in which such an expla-
nation is given; (f) a collection
of such treatises and (g) a syste-
matic explanation of the formation
of words in a language (ब्याकरणशास्त्र
or इद्वानुद्भासन); cf.(a) क्रयाक्रियते अनेन इति
ब्याक्ररणम् ;M.Bh.on Ahnika 1, Vart.
12: cf. (b) लक्ष्यलक्षणे व्याकरणम्: M.
Bh. Ahnika 1, Vart. 14; cf. (c) न
यथा लोके तथा व्याकरण M. Bh. on P.
I. 1.1. Vart. 7; d) सर्वत्रैव हि व्याकरणे
पूर्वाचारित: सई परोचारिता संज्ञा M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.1. Vart 7: (e) न तथा लोके यथा
याक्ररणे M.Bh. on P, I. 1.23 Wrt.
4: cf.(f)इहृ च व्याकरणे शाब्दकार्यस्य संभव:,
अर्थं असंभवः | M. Bh. on P. I. 1.68.
cf. (g) व्याकरणं नाम इयमुतरा विद्या [ M.
Bh. on P. I. 2.32. The word व्याक-
रण is mostly used in the sense of
* the Science of Grammar ' in the
Mahbhasya. It is explained by
modern scholars as* the law of
, |: he correctness of pscdhand

व्याकरणचन्द्रिका
350
व्याघ्रपाद्
etymological science and describ-
ed both as a science and am art.
व्याकरणचन्द्रिका a short treatise on
grammar written by Krspacarya.
व्याकरणदर्हीन the science of Vyaka-
rana with the element of Sphota
introduced in it and brought
consequently on a par with the
other Darsanas by the stalwart
grammar-scholar Bhartrhari of
the 7th century A. D. For details
see Sarvadarsanasarhgraha * Pani-
nidarsanam ' and page 385 Vol.
VII. of the Vyakarana Maha-
bhasya edited by the D. E-
Society, Poona.
व्याकरणदीप a small treatise on gram-
mar by Cidrupasraya.
व्याकरणदीपिका nume of a short gloss
or Vrtti on the Sutras of Panini
written by a modern scholar of
grammar Orambhatta ofVarnasi.
व्याकरणप्रकाशा name of the comme-
ntary written by MahamiSra on
Jinendrabuddhi's great work
*Kasikavivaranapafijika or Nyasa.
व्याकरणमहाभाष्य see मह्याभाष्य,
व्याकरणमहाभाष्यगृढाथेर्दीपिनी a brief
commentary on the Mahbhasya,
written by Sadasiva, son of Nila-
kantha and pupil of Kamalakara
Dksita. The gloss confines itself
to the explanations ofobscure and
difficult passages in the Mah-
bhasya and criticizes Kaiyata's
explanations.
व्याकरणमहाभ the original
name of the learned commentary
on Patafijali's Mahabhsya by
Kaiyatabhatta the well-known
grammarian of Kashmir of the
eleventh century. See प्रदीप and
कैयट.
व्याकरणमहाभाष्यप्रदीपविवरण ( ) a gloss
on the Mahabhasyapradipa of
Kaiyata, written by ईश्वरानन्द, a
pupil ofसत्यानन्द; (2) a gloss on the
Mahbhasyapradipa of Kaiyata by
नाराय0.
व्याकरणमहाभाष्यप्रदीपोद्द्योत the wal.
known scholarly commentary by
the stalwart grammarian Nagesa-
bhagta on the Mahabhasyapradipa
of Kaiyata. See उद्द्योत and नागेशा.
व्याकरणमहाभाष्यव्याख्या महंभाष्य
above.
व्याकरणरत्नावली a short work on gra-
mmar written by विद्यारत्न गौरमीदनं.
व्याकरणसंग्रह a small grammar work
written by a grammar scholar
Gangadhara which is based upon
the Mugdhabodha of Bopadeva.
व्याकरणसुघानि|घ a gloss on the Sutras
of Panini written by Visvesvara.
व्याकरणाध्ययनप्रयोजन the purpose of
the study of Grammar which is
beautifully sumtmed up and dis-
cussed in the first Ahnika by Pat-
afijali in his Mahabhasya.
व्याकरणान्तर a term used by scholars
of the Pininiyan system of gra-
mmar with respect to grammar
works of other systems such as the
Katantra, the Sakatyana, and
others: cf. श्रन्थिग्रान्थदाम्भिस्वञ्जीनां लिटः
क्रित्वं व्याकरणान्तर S.K. on अश्रोतेश्च P.
VII.4.72.
व्याख्यान (1) explanation of a rule, or
a line, or a verse by analysing the
rule and giving examples and
counter-examples; cf. न केवलानि
चर्चापदानि व्याख्यानं वृद्धिः आत् एजिति | किं
तर्हि	उदाहृरणं प्रत्युदाहृरणं वाक्याध्याहारः इत्य-
तत्समुदितं व्याख्यानं भवति | M.Bh. Ahnika
l Vart.1 1;(2)authoritative decision
given in places of doubt by ancient
scholars; cf. याख्थानतेो विशेषप्रतिपत्ति: न
हि संदेहादलक्षणम् M. Bh. Ahnika .1;
Par.Sek.Pari.1.
see
| व्याघ्रपाद् name of an ancient gram-
marian who is quoted in the Prati-
sakhya works and theMahabhaya

व्याघभूत
351
व्याप्य
His grammar work was called
*dasaka' possibly on account of its
consisting of 10 chapters; cf मiध्य-
, fन्दनिर्वष्टि गुणं त्बिगन्त नपुसंक्र व्याघ्रपदां वरिष्ठ:
KaS. on P.VII.194; cf. also द्राक्रा
वैयाघ्रपदीया: Kas, , on P.IW.2.65.
name of an old gramma-
rian later than Patafijali who is
quoted by later grammarians; cf.
व्याघभुत्यादयस्त्वेनं नह्य पेटुरिति स्थितम् Sid-
dhantakaumudi on अात्मनेपेदष्वनतः
P. VII. 1. 5. _
व्याघ्रादि a class of words headed by
व्याघ which, as standards of compa-
rison, are compounded with
words showing objects of compa-|
rison provided the common pro-
perty is not mentioned: e.g.
पुरुषव्याघ्:, नृसिंहृः etc., cf. Kas. onP.II.
1.56.
ब्याड name of an ancient gramma-
rian with a sound scholarship in
Vedic phonetics,accentuation,deri-
vation of words and their inter-
pretation. He is believed to have
been a relative and contemporary
of Panini and to have written a
very scholarly vast volume on San-
skrit grammar named *Saringraha
which is believed to have consist- !
ed of a lac of verses; cf. संग्रहो व्याडि-
कृतो लक्षसंख्ये ग्रन्थ: NageSa's Uddyota;
cf. also इह पुरा पाणिनीये अस्मिन्व्याकरण
ब्याडयुपराचेतं लक्षग्रन्थपरिमाणं निबन्धनमासीत्
Vak. Pad. Tika. The work is not
available at present. References
to Vyadi or to his work are found
in the Pratisakhya works, the
Mahabhsya, the Varttikas, the
Vakyapadya and manysubsequent
treatises.A work on the Vyakaraha
Paribhasas, believed to have been
written by Vyadi, is available by
the name परिभाषासूचन which from
its style and other peculiarities
seems to have been written after
the Varttikas, but before the
Mahabhasya. Vyadi is well-known
to have been the oldest exponent
of the doctrine that words denote
an individual object and not the
genus For details see pp. 136-8,
Vol. 7 Vyakarana - Mahabhsya
D- E. Society's Edition.
व्याडीय name given to the pupils and
students belonging to the school
of Wyadi; cf. M.Bh, on P.WI.2.36.
व्यापक covering or applying to the
whole in entirety, and not in
parts;.cf. अाधकरणे नाम त्रिप्रकारं व्यापक्रमो-
पक्षापकं वैषयिकमिति M. Bh. on P.VI.1.
72;cf. इतरो व्यापकत्वाच्छास्त्रासिद्धत्वं प्रदशान्तर
एव स्थापितं मन्यमान आहृ [ Kaiyata on
P. VI.4.22.
व्यापत्ति lit. loss or disappearance; the
word is used in the sense of com-
version ofone thing into another
in the Pratisakhya works; cf. अथा-
प्यन्तव्यापत्तिभेवति Nir. II. l ; cf also
अन्यैरेकारान्नातरत्र पूर्वौ ततो व्यापतिभवतीति
विद्यात् R. Pr.V.1.
व्याप्त occupied fully cf. तदाधकरणं यत्र
कृत्स्न अाधारात्मा ब्याप्ता भवति M. Bh. on
P.I.3.11 Vart. 7: cf also M.Bh. on
PI.4.42; यावता सर्वमद्यापवादैक्याम्P.IV.
3.134 Vart. 2.
व्यानि occupation: presence compre-
hensive nature; cf बयारीमत्वासु शब्दस्य
Nir.I.2, where ब्याति refers to the
permanent presence of the word
in the minds of the speaker and
the hearer, the word शब्द referring
to the नित्यदाब्द or रूपेाट.
व्याप्तिन्याय the general method of
taking a comprehensive sense
instead of a restricted one in places
ofdoubt; cf. याानन्यायाद्वा Kas. on P.
III. 2. 168. '
ब्याप्य lit. that which is occupied; the
word refers to a kind of an object
where the object is occupied by the
verbal activity of the transitive
root; the word अाप्य is also used in

यायत
352
_
व्युत्पांतवाद्
this sense: cf. कर्म निर्वेत्र्यं विकार्यं प्राप्यं च
ग्रस्य प्रकृत्युच्छद गुणान्तरं बोत्पद्यत तद्विकार्यम्
Srihgara- Praksa 2, The term is
used as a technical term instead
of the term कर्म in the Hemacandra,
Cndra and other systems of
grammar: cf. Hem. II.2.3;Candra
I.1.23.
व्यायत separated; one out of the two |
conjoined consonants separated by
inserting a vowel in between; cf.
वयस्यन्त्यन्तमेहृतेाs व्यायतं तं दीघायु: सूये
रुशदीर्त ऊर्जम् R. Pr. XIV. 19,where
Uvvata gives the explanation-दीघर्वा-
त्परं अब्यायतं अपृथग्भूतं रपेण सक्तमित्यर्थः एवं-
भूतं व्यस्यात पृथक्कुर्वन्ति | यथा | दीरिघायु: !
सूरय: | रुशदीरिते | ऊरजम्. Rk Sarhhit
I. 85. 39, K. 158. 1, IX. 91.3 and
IX. 63. 2.
व्यावर्तन reversing the order of words
and going back from a subsequent
word to the previous one, as in
the Krama,.Japa and other artifi-
cial recitals of Veda.
व्यावृति pushing aside removal; the
word is frequently used in connec-
tion with the setting aside or
removal of the application ofsuch
rules, as also of the contingency of
such rules as are not desired in
the formation of a correct word,
by means of applying another rule
necessary for the correct forma-
tion; gf तद्वि इदं तिष्यपुनर्वसु इत्यत्र
तद्वथावृत्त्यर्थम् Par. Sek. on Pari. 34;
as also ताद्व असवर्णग्रहृणं ईषतुरित्यादौ
इयडादिव्यावृत्त्यर्थम् Par.Sek. on Pari.55:
cf also the usual statement ब्यावृति:
क्रियते ! _
व्याश्रय resting on, or applying to,
different words or elements of
words or parts of words the word
is used in connection with a
grammatical operation which
affects one part of the word,
as distinguished from another ]
operation which affects another
part ;.cf. आभीयं कार्यं समानाश्रयमासद्धम् |
व्याश्रयं सिद्धं भवति | M.Bh. on P.III.i.>
44, VI. 4.22 Vart.12, VI.4.42 etc.
व्यास (1) showing separately; separate
expression as contrasted with
समास; (2) fault of pronunciation
of the type of unnecessarily ex-
tending the place of origin as also
the instrument of the production
of sound; cf. स्थानकरणयोर्विस्तारे क्यासे
नाम दोषो जायते Uvvapa on R. Pr.
XIV. 2.
व्याहृति or ब्याहृती lit. the utterance of
a word the word is generally
used in the sense of the specific
utterance of the words भू:, भुव: etc:
cf. एताभिब्र्याहृतीभिः प्रजापति: Tait.
Sarh I. 6. 10, cf. also भुवश्च महाव्याहृत:
P. VIII. 2.71.
व्युत्क्रमण the same as ब्यावर्तन or परिवर्तन,
which see above. !
व्युत्पत्ति derivation of a word from a
root which formed a special
feature of the Nairukta school of
Vedic scholars in ancient times;
the word निर्वेचन is used in the
same sense: cf. सति संभवे ब्युत्पत्तिरन्यथा
कर्तव्या रूढरनियमात् Ks. on P.V. 2.93.
व्युत्पत्तिपक्ष the view that every word
is derived from a suitable root as
contrasted with the other view
viz. the अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष. The gramma-
rians hold that Panini held the
अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष,i.e. the view that not all
words in a language can be derived
but only some of them can be so
done, and contrast him (i.e.Panini)
with an equally great grammarian
Sakatayana who stated that every
word has to be derived: cf. न्यग्रो-
धयतीति न्यग्रोध इति व्युत्पत्तिपक्षे नियमार्थम् !
अव्युत्पत्तिपक्ष विध्यर्थम् Kas.on P.VII.3.6.
व्युत्पत्तिवाद (l) name given to a topic
in grammar whichdeals with the
derivation of words as suitable to

_
853
ईकखइाास्री
the sense: (2) name given to
treatises discussing the derivation
and interpretation of words.
व्युत्पन्नत्व derivation, correct under-
standing of the sense by derivation.
युत्पन्नपक्ष the view that every word
in the language has been derived
from a root which explains its
sense, see व्युत्पत्तिपक्ष.
व्युदास setting aside of a rule or ope-
ration by means of another
more powerful rule, or by means
of a conventional dictum.
व्युष्टादि a class of words headed by
the word युश्ट to which the taddhita
affix अ (अण् ) is added in the sense
of the place where something is
given or prepared ; cf. व्युष्ट दयिते कार्य
बा वैयुष्टम् ， नैत्यम्: Kas. on P.V.1.97.
व्यूहं (l) resolution or determination:
cf. अकृतव्यूहाः पाणिनीयाः | न कृतो विाशीष्ट
ऊर्ह निश्चयः ，ास्त्रप्रवृत्तिविषये यैः इत्यर्थः Par.
Sek. Pari. 56; (2) separation ofthe
phonetic elements in a word, done
especially for the recital of the
Vedic texts according to metre:cf.
व्यूहैः संपत्समीक्ष्येन क्षेप्रवणैकंभावनाम् | व्यूहे:
पृथकरोणन Uvvata on R. Pr. VIII.22.
बेङ्गन lowering of the chin, resulting
in a fault of utterance: cf. हृन्वीत्रडिने
नीचैर्भावे संदधे नाम दोषो भवंति	Uvvata
on R.Pr. XIV.8.
व्रीह्यादि a class of words headed by
व्रीहि to which the taddhita affixes
इन् and ठन् are applied in the sense
of possession along with the usual
affix मत् ( मतुप् ) ; e. g. व्रीहृ, व्रीहृक्रः
त्रीहृमान् | मायो, मायिकः मायावान् : cf.
Kas. on P.V. 2. 116.
ठिइट्ने [ WHITNEY, WILLIAM
DWIGHT, 1827-1894] a sound
scholar of Vedic grammar who
has, besides some books on Ling-
uistic studies, written a work on
Vedic Grammar and edited the
Atharvaveda Pratisakhya.
45
इा
् (1) a sibilant letter of the palatal
class, possessed of the properties,
श्वासानुप्रदान, अधेाष and कण्ठविवृतत्व; (2)
the initial indicatory ( इत् ) letter
¶ of a non-taddhita affixin Paninis
grammar, which is dropped; (3)
substitute for च् when followed by
an affix beginning with a nasal con-
sonant; e.g प्रश्न:, cf. P.VI.4.19;(4)
substitute for स् when followed by ्
or any palatal letter;e.g. वृक्षश्छादयति
वृक्ष|्ते Ks.on P. VIII. 4.40.
झा (I) conjugational sign(विकरण) appli-
ed to the roots of the sixth comju-
gation ( तुदादिगण ) in all conjuga-
tional tenses and moods ( i, e. the
present, the imperfect,the impera-
tive and the potential ) before the
personal-endings; cf. तुदादिभ्यः दा:,
P. III.1.77; this sign ढा ( अ ) has
got the initial consonant ， as an
indicatory one, and hence this अ
is a Sarvadhatuka affix, but, it
is weak and does not cause गुण
for the preceding vowel; ( 2 )
tad. affix इ in the sense of
possession applied to the words
लेीमन् and others; e. g. लोमश:,
रमइा:cf. P.V.2. 100; (3) krt affix
(अ ) applied to the roots पा, ब्रा, मा,
ध and दृढप् when preceded by a
prefix,to the roots लिम्प्, विन्द् etc.not
preceded by a prefix, and optiona-
ily to दा and घा of the third conju-
gation in the sense of an agent';
e.g. उापबः, उत्पद्य:, लिम्प:, विन्दः दद:,
दायः: cf. P.III.1.137-139.
ईक्खभट् name of a grammarian of
the eighteenth century who wrote
a commentary, called -ंकरी after
him, on NageSa's Paribhasendu-
8ekhara.
ईौकरइााख्त्री ( मारुलकर ) a modern sch9-
1ar of grammar who lived in

ईौखध्म ， 354
इातृ
Poona and did the work 0fteaching
and writing commentaries. He has
written a commentary mamedदाांकरी
on the VaiyakarahabhपेSanasara of
Kondabhatta.
ईखध्म name given to a Yama letter
in the Siks treatises.
शाकन्धुक name of a class of words in
whose case the last vowel of the
first word does not coalesce with
the first vowel of the mext word;
e. g. दाक अन्धुक्र ईदा | अक्षपा असि |
वपा इव त्मना | सुपथा अकृण्वन् [ cf.
इकन्धुकादीनाम् R.T.87 which is ex-
plained by the commentator as
इक्रन्धुक्रादीनां च न संनिकृष्यत.
इाकन्ध्वादि name of a class of words in
which an irregular coalescence of
the vowels of the kind of the
latter vowel in the place of the
former and latter both is observed;
e.g. दाक्रन्धु:, कुलटा, सीमन्त:,मनीषा etc.cf.
क्रन्ध्बादेषु न्व (पररूपं वाच्यम् ) P.VI.1. 94
Vart. 4.
इाक्त endowed with इाात i. e. the
potentiality to express the sense;
potent to show the particular
SenSe.
इाक्ति potentiality of expressing the
sense which is p0ssessed by words
permanently with them: denota-
tive potentiality or denotation; this
potentiality shows the senses,which
are permanently possessed by the
words, to the hearer and is descri-
bed to be of one kind by ancient
grammarian as contrasted with the
two (अभिघा and लक्षणा) mentioned by
the modern ones. It is described
to be oftwo kinds-(a) स्मारिका इारी
or recalling capacity which com.
bines चैत्रत्व with पाक, and अनुभाव-
का दाक्ति which is responsible for the
actual meaning of a sentence. For
details see Vakyapadiya III.
शाक्य the substratum of potentiality
which forms the object pointed out
by means of the potentiality to the
hearer by the word (i.e. इाब्द) which
directly communicates the sense,
in which case it is termed वाचक as
contrasted with भदक or √ीतक when
the sense,which is ofthe type ofसंबन्ध
is conveyed rather indirectly. This
nice division into वाचकता andभदकता
was introduced clearly by भतृहृरि:
cf. Vakyapadtya Kanda 2.
शाङ्ककटद्यु tad. affix इाङ्कट applied opti-
onally with the affix इालच् ( झाल )
to the prefix वि in the sense of the
base itself ( स्वार्थे); e.g. विदाङ्ककटम् !
विशालम् ; cf. S.K. on P.V. 2.28; cf.
Kव!. on P.V.2.28 which states
विज्ञााल विदाङ्कट दृङ्ग ] तस्माद् गौरपि विदाङ्कट
उच्यते !
इर्माण्डकादि a class of words headed.by
the word इाण्डिक which have the
taddhita affix य ( य ) added to
them in the sense of "domicile' or '
*native place?: e.g. दाण्डिक्य:, सार्व-
सन्यः, cf. Kas. on P. IV. 3. 92.
इात् tad. affix इात् as seen in the words
त्रिंशात्, चत्वारिंशात् etc., cf. पाङ्क्तविंशतित्रिं-
इाचत्वरिंइत्o P. V.1.59.
रातपाद conventional name given to
the fourth pda of the fifth adhyaya
ofPahinis Astadhyayi which begins
with the sutra पाददातस्य संख्यांदेवींसायां
बुन् लेपश्च P. V. 4.1.
शात tad. affix इति applied to the
word द्वि to form the word वंशाति;
cf. P. V. 1. 59.
शातृ krt affix अत् in the sense of * the
agent of the present time ', appli-
ed to any root which takes the
Parasmaipada personal affixes
cf. लट: इातृशानचावप्रथमासमानाधिकरणे P.
III. 2.126,8. The words formed
with this इातृ (अत्) affix are termed
present participles in the declen-
sion of which, by virtue of the
indicatory vowel ऋ in रावृ, the

इातृस्वर
355 इाब्द
augment नुम् is inserted after the
last vowel of the base, and the
root receives such modifications as
are caused by a Sarvadhatuka affix, |
the affix शतृ being looked upon
as a Sarvadhatuka affix on account
of the indicatory letter -ं. The
word ending in this affix शतृ |
governs a noun forming its object,
in the accusative case.
शाढस्वर the acute accent specifically
stated for the vowel of the case-
affix beginning with a vowel etc.
prescribed by the rule इातुरनुमेयां नद्य-
जादो P. VI. 1.173: cf. इातृस्वर , तुदतीं
नुदतीं ... भ्रातुरनुमो नद्यजादिरन्तेदात्तादित्वष
स्वरे यथा स्यात्M. Bh. on P. VIII.
2.6. Vart 2.
राध्ये, श्यैन् krt affix अथै in the sense
of the infinitive added, to.a root as
seen in the Vedic Literature: cf.
तुमर्थे संसनसअसन्सकसनध्यैअथैन्कयकयैन्-
इध्येशध्यैन्तवैतवेङ्कतवेन:, P. III. 4.9.
राए a vikarana affix ( conjugational
sign ) applied to roots of the first
conjugation and in general to all
secondary roots i. e. roots formed
from nouns and from other roots
before personal-endings which are
Sarvadhatuka and which possess
the sense of agent, provided there
is no other vikarana affix prescrib-
ed: e. g. भवति, एधते, कारयति, हृारयति,
बुभूषति, पुत्रीयति, पुत्रकाम्यति, कामयत,
गेीपांयति, कण्ङ्कयति, पटयति, दिनान्त (यामिन्य:)
etc. cf. कर्तरि इप् , P. III.1 .68.
This affix दाप् is dropped after roots
of the second conjugation (अदादि }
and those of the third conjugation
( जुहोत्यादि) and in Vedic Literature
wherever observed; cf. P.II.4.72,
73, 75, 76.
शाबरस्वामिन् a grammarian to whom a
metrical treatise on genders named
लिङ्गानुशासन is ascribed. This द्रावरस्वा-
मिन् was comparatively a modern
grammarian who was given the
title बालयोगीश्वर. This लिङ्गानुशासन has
a commentary written by हृर्षवर्धन
Evidently these grammarians
शबरस्वामिन् and हृर्षवर्धन are different
from the famous author of the
मीमांसाभाष्य and the patron of the
poet Bana respectively.
- इाब्दज्ञा the Wikarana affixes इयन् , रा>
श्रम्, उ and श्रा according to those
who hold the view that these affixes
do not form the exceptions ofराप्,
but they are substituted for दाप् .
cf. इबादेशाः इयन्नादय: करिष्यन्ते M. Bh.
on P. I.1.27, II.2.3, III.1.33 and
III.1.67.
इाब्द् lit. *sound' in general; cf. दाब्दं कुरु
इाब्दं मा कार्षीः , ध्वनिं कुर्वनेवमुच्यते | M.Bh.
in Ahnika I; cf. also दाब्दः प्रकृतिः
सर्ववर्णानाम् | वर्णपृक्: इाब्दे वान्व उत्पात: T.
Pr. XXIII.1, XXIII.3.In grammar
the word इाब्द is applied to such
words only as possess sense; cf.
प्रतीतपदार्थकं लेोके ध्वनि: इाब्द: M. Bh. in
Ahnika 1: cf.also येनेीचारितेन अर्थः
प्रतीयेत स इाब्दः Sringira Prakasa I; cf.
also अथ इाब्दानुशासनम् M.Bh. Ahnika
1. In the Vajasaneyi-Pratisakhya,
इाब्द् is said to be constituted of air
as fair as its nature is concerned,
but it is taken to mean in the
Prtisakhya and grammar works in
a restricted sense as letters possess-
ed of sense, The Wajasaneyi-
Pratisakhya gives four kinds of
words तिङ्क, कृत्, ताद्वत and समास्र
while नाम, आख्यात, निपात and उपसगे
are described to be the four kinds
in the Nirukta. As इाब्दingrammar,
is restricted to a phonetic unit
possessed of sense, it can be appli-
ed to crude bases, affixes, as.also
to words that are completely
formed with case-endings or perso-
nal affixes. In fact, taking it to be
applicable to all such kinds, some
grammarians have given tweive
' subdivisions of शब्द, viz- श्रढति, मत्यय,

शाब्दकौस्तुभ
शाब्दबोधप्रक्रिया
उपत्कार, उपपद, प्रातिपदिक, विभाकडपसन,
मासं प्रद, वृाक्य, प्रकरण and प्रबन्ध: cf.
Sringara Prakasa I.
शाब्द्कैस्तुम a treatise on grammar,
gritically explaining and discuss
ing the meaning ofPanini's Sutrag
¶ the order of the author himser.
3be.work is written by Bhattoji
Dksita and is mainly based onthe
Mahabhasya.
_ a short gloss on Bha-
toj's Sabdakaustubha written by
a.8्ammarian named इन्द्रदतापाध्यायं
S
शब्दकैस्डभटीका or इाद्रौस्तुभप्रभा ,
9ommentary on Bhattoj's Sabda-
kaustubha written by Vaidyanatha
Payagunde.
शब्द्कौस्तुभव्याख्या a commentary on
Bhattoji's Sabdakaustubha, named
ख्या a name probably
given to a commentary written by
Nagesa.
शाब्द्चा्दकोद्वार mame of a commen-
tary on the Sarasvata-Vyakarana
by Kasavijaya.
|्तत्व Iit. the essence of , word;
the ultimate sense conveyed by the
Wod which is termed स्पेनंट by H
Vaiyakaranas. Philosophically this
Sabdatattva or Sphota is the phi-
losophical Brahman Br the Vedan-
tins, which is named as Sabdabra-
hma or Nadabrahma by the Vaiy-
karaas,and which appears as the
Phenomenal world of the basis of
ts own powers such ash time
factor and the like & अनादानेधनं
*ब्दतत्वं यदुक्षरम् ! विवर्ततेर्थभ् !
जगतो यतः | Wikyapadya, I.1: cfः
alsoVakyapadya TII.31.
शाब्द्दीपिका name of a commentary on
the Mugdhabodha Vyakarapa by
Govindarma.
शाब्दद्योत्यत्व the ndicatory power to
how the sense; the wor is used
in connection with the potentiality
% %vey the sense possessed by
the Nipatas.
शाब्दानित्यत्व the doctrine of the Vaiy्-
karanas as also of the Mimam-
sakas that word is Permanent, as
c9ntrasted with thatof tha Naiya-
yikas who advocate the imperman-
ence of words,
इाब्द्परविप्रतिषेध cl,. comparativelysup-
eriorstrength possessed by a word,
which in the text of a particular
stra is later than another word,
which_is put in earlier in the
StraThis शब्दपरविप्रतिषेधे is co्
% with the standard इास्रपरीक्षे
which islaid down by Panini in
his rule विप्रतिषेधे परं कार्यम् and ,
lays down the superior strength of
that f ule which is put by Panini
later on in his Astadhyay: e. 8. in
the rule विभाषा गमहृनविदावेशाम्,it isnot
the word हुन् although occuring
garlier, but the word वैश्याः occuring
later in the rule, which helps us to
decide which विद् should be"a्
cfरानार्थस्य सत्यपि विदरूपत्वे अह्रुं ह्रुं
रूपवदृश्र्ण्ढप्रतेषेधाभावः | यद्यपिं नं
|्च विंदुरासूत तृथापि शब्दंरंवेaर्क
विद्दिव्येवस्थाहेतुर्न ह्यातः ! Kaiyata on P.
VII.2.18:cf. also, P.VI.1.158 V.12.
राब्दप्रभा name of a commentary on
Bhartrharis Wakyapadya which
s available only on the G्
Kºnda.
शब्दपारायण recital or enumead, of
9ne Word after another in a
language: cf वृहृस्पातरिन्द्राय देव वर्षसहृखं
भ्रतिपदेक्तृानां शब्दानां इाब्दपारोयंणं प्रेक्षेहं
जगाम \4.Bh. Ahnika 1.
रान्दमयोग use of a word ia the spoken
language which forms in ; way
the basis of grammar.
शाब्द्बोधप्रक्रिया a 8arnmar treatise on
the denotation and relation of
words written by a grammarian
ramed Ramakpsna.

इाब्दभूषण
357
इाब्दास्रद्धि
शाब्दभूषण name of a short gloss on the
Sutras of Panini, written by Nara-
yana Pandita.
name of a small gra-
mmatical work written by Rama-
candra Diksita,
शब्दमञ्जरी name of a short grammar
work written by Narayana
Pandita.
शाब्द्ररत्न name of a scholarly gloss
written by Haridiksita on the
Manorama, a commentary by
Bhatt0j Diksita on his own
Siddhantakaumudf. The proper
name of the commentary is लधु-
शब्दरत्न of which शब्दरत्न is an abridg-
ed form.The commentary लधु्ाब्दरत्न
is generally studied along with
the Manorama by students.There
is a bigger work named बृहृच्छब्दरत्न
written by Hari Diksita, of which
the लधुराद्वरन्न is an abridgment.
शाब्दरत्नटोका known by the name
भावप्रकाशिका, a commentary on Hari
Dksita's Sabdaratna, written by
Vaidyanatha Payagunde.
a commentary on the
Laghusabdaratna written by a
grammarian named Kalyana-
malla.
शाब्दरूप fhe actual form of a word
as a collection of letters or वर्णसमूहृ
or वर्णानुपूर्वीं irrespective of the sense.
In grammar it is the इब्दरूप that is
mainly considered and not the
meaning of the word; cf. स्व रूपं
राब्दस्यान्ाब्दसंज्ञा, P.I.1.68.
इाब्द्रूपावळि a very brief treatise on
declension giving the forms of the
seven cases of a few choice-words.
The work is studied as the first
elementary work and is very
common without the name of any
specific author.There are different
works named इाब्दरूपावलि giving de-
glensions of different words which
are all anonymous, although from
the dates of manuscripts mention-
cd, they appear to be more than
five or six hundred years old.
राब्दवाच्यत्व expression of its sense
by a word which occurs to the
mind of the hearer as soon as a
word is heard.
शाब्दविवरण a grammar work on the
meaning of words and how it is
conveyed, written by a gramma-
rian named वर्णिकुबेरानन्द The work
forms a part of his bigger work
दानभागवृत. See वार्णकुवेरानन्द,
इाब्द्युत्पात derivation of a word by
tracing it to the root from which
" it is formed.
ौमुदी a small treatise on
the derivation of words written by
a grammarian named Rajarama-
Sistrin.
शाब्द्क्रााख्न the sciene ofwords.The term
is generally applied to grammar,
although strictly speaking the
Mimrhs Sastra is also a science of
words.
इाब्द्सेचय an anonymous elementary
booklet on declension similar to
Sabdarpaval.
इाब्द्स्पंज्ञा a technical term given to a
wording irrespective of the sense
element as contrasted with अर्थसंज्ञा.
See.e.g. धु, भ or the like: cf. इाब्दसंज्ञायां
ह्यर्थासंप्रत्यये यथान्यत्र P.I. 1.44 Vart. 2.
इाब्द्सत्त्वप्रकाशा a work on grammar
said to have been written by a
grammarian named इन्द्रदत्त.
इाब्द्साध्यप्रयोग a grammar work on
the formation of words written by
a grammarian named रमानाथरार्मी.
इाब्द्साद्वि (1)formation of a complete
word fit for use by adding proper
suffixes to the crude base and .
making the necessary modifica-
tions cf. नैव व्याकरणादृते शब्दसिद्धिः |

इाब्द्सुधा
358
इामादि
( 2 ) name of a commentary by
मंइदव on the Katantra stºtravptti
by Durgasirhha.
इाब्द्सुधा name ofa grammar work by
a grammarian named अनन्तभट.
इाब्दानुशासन lit. science ofgrammar
dealing with the formation of I
words, their accents, and use in a
sentence. The word is used in
connection with standard works
on grammar which are complete
and self-sufficient in all the above-
mentioned features. Patafijaji
has begun his Mahabhasya with
the words अथ दाब्दानुशासनम् referring
possibly to the vast mum er of
Varttikas on the Stºtras of Paini,
and hence the term शब्दानुशासन
according to him means a treatise
on the science ofgrammar made
up of the rules of Panini with the
explanatory and critical Warttikas
written by Katyayana and other
Varttikakiras.The word शब्दानुशासन
later on, became synonymons
with Vyakarana and it was given
as a title to their treatises by later
grammarians, or was applied to
the authoritative treatise which
introduced a system ofgrammar,
similar to that of Panini, Hema-
candra's famous treatise, named
सिद्धहेमचन्द्र by the author,came to be
known as ईमदाब्दानुशासन. Similarly
the works on grammar written by
पाल्यकीर्तिदाकटायन and देवनान्दन् were
called शाकटायनदाव्दानुद्भासन and जेनेन्द्र- '
शब्दानुशासन respectively.
शाब्दान्तर a different wording, as it
results from modifications such as
gama, or adesa, or lopa; cf. शब्दा-
न्तरस्य प्राप्नुवन् विधिरनित्य: Par. Sek.
Pari. 43, .
शब्दामृत a work, explanatory of the
Sitras of Panini, written by a
grammarian named विप्रराजन्द्र.
इाब्द्धार्थप्रतिपति, ्ाब्दाथेप्रत्यय knowledge
ofthe meaning ofa word from that
word when heard, the word being
either denotative ( वाचक ) or ind
cative ( द्योतक ).
इाब्दाथेरहृस्य a grammatical work on
the interpretation of words by
Ramanatha Vidyavacaspati.
श्ाब्दाथेसंबन्ध the connection between
a word and its sense which is a
permanently established one.
According to grammarians,words,
their sense and their connection,
all the three, are established for
ever: cf. सिद्ध राव्दार्थसंबन्ध P. I.1.
. Varttika 1,and the Bhasya thereon
सिद्ध दाब्द: अर्थः संबन्धश्चेति | Later gra-
mmarians have described twelve
kinds of शब्दार्थस्वन्ध viz. अभिधा,विवक्षा,
तात्पर्य, प्रविभाग, ब्यपेक्षा, सामथ्ये अन्वय,
एकार्थीभाव, दोषहृन, गुणोपादान, अलंकारयेाग
and रसावियोग: cf. SrihgraprakSa.I.
इाब्द्थेव्याकरण explanation of the
sense of a word as arising from
the word by stating the base, the
affixes and the modifications to
the base and the affixes.
इाब्द्थेशाख्त्र a science fully dealing
with the words in a language and
their sense; the same ae इच्दानुशासन
which see above.
इाब्देन्दुशेखर a popular name given to
theLaghusabdendusekhara written
by Nºgesabha!a. See लबुशब्देन्दुशेखर.
इाब्देन्दुशेखरटीका, शाब्देन्दुशेखरव्याख्या
See लबुढादेन्दुशेखरटकI and लघुशब्देन्दुशे-
रनरळयाग्द्वय[.
इाब्दोपदेइा scientific and authoritative
citation or statement of a word
as contrasted with अपशव्देपदेश; cf.
किं इाब्दोपदेदा: कर्तव्यः आहोस्विदप्ाब्दापेदशा:
आहोस्बिदुभयेपददा इति	M. Bh. in
Ahnika l.
शामादि a class of eight roots headed
by इम् which get their vowel
lengthened before the conjuga-
tional sign य (्यन्) as also before the

शाम्भु
krt. affix इन् ( घिनुण् ) in the sense
of habituated to': e.g. दाम्यति, ढामी,
भ्राम्यति, भ्रमी etc.: cf. P.VII.3.74 and
P. III.2.141.
शाम्भु God Siva who is supposed to
have composed, or to have inspir-
ed Panini to compose, the fourteen
. Stºtras अइउण् , ऋलृक् etc. giving the
alphabet of the Patini system ) cf.
त्रुटिः चतुःबहििर्व वर्णाः शम्भुमते मृताः Pan.
Siks, St. 3.
शार्a brief term or Pratyahara stand-
ing for the three sibilant or spi-
rant consonants द् , ष् and स्.
इारणदेव a prominent grammarian of
the Eastern school of Paninis
system of grammar who lived in
the thirteenth century and wrote
works on Phini's grammar. His
work named दुघटवृात which ex.
plains according to Panini's rules,
the Varttikas thereon, and the
Japakas deduced from them,the
various words difficult to be ex-
plained, is much appreciated by
scholars ofgrammar. He has guot-
ed from a large number of classi-
cal works, and referred to many
works of the Eastern grammarians
who followed the Kasik school.
इारत्प्रभृति the words of the type of
शरद् such as विपाद्, अनुस्, मनस् ,
उपाने etc. which have the com-
pound-ending अ (टड् ) added to
them when they are at the end
ofthe Avyayibhva compound;e.g
प्रातशारदम्, प्रतिविपाशम्.cf Ks. on P.V.
4.107.
इारादि a class of words headed by the
word इार which have the tad. affix
मच (मयट्) added to them in the sense
of *product or portion': e.g.
इारमयम् , दर्भमयम् , मृण्मयम्: cf Kas. on
P. IV.3.144;(2) a class of words
headed by इर which get their final
vowel lengthened before the
359
शास्
tad.affix मत् when the whole word
forms a proper noun: e.g. दारावती,
|्ती, हृनुमान् ; cf. P.VI.3.119.
राकेरादि a class of words headed by
शर्करा to which the tad. affix अ (अण्)
is added in the sense of इव viz.
शूimilarity:cf इर्करेख शुकंरम् ,कापालेकम्,
पौण्डरीकम् Ks on P. V. 3.107.
इार्ववर्मा a reputed grammarian who
is believed to have been a contem-
porary of the poet Gundhya in
the court of Stavhana. He wrote
the Grammar rules which are
named the Katantra Sutras which
are mostly based on the Stºtras of
Panini. In the grammar treatise
named *the Katantra Sitra*written
by Sarvavarman the Vedic section
and all the intricacies and difficult
elements are carefully and scrup-
ulously omitted by him, with a
view to making his grammar
useful for beginners and students
of average intelligence.
इाव्येवाय intervention by any one of
the spirants ् , घ् and स्, which
prevents the substitution of ए for न्
but allows the substitution ofष् for
मु: cf. बुद्धतुलढाव्र्यवाये न M.Bh. on P.
VIII.4.2 as also नुम्विसर्जनीयदाब्र्यवायपि
P. WIII.3.58 Wart. 1. _
इाट् short term (प्रत्याहृार ) for the
sibilants ， , ， , स् and हृ: cf. झाल
इगुपधादनिटः क्स: P.III.1.44.
बावगे class of letters beginning with ्
i.e the consonants य् , व् , र् and दृ .
* x :
ठाद्विवृत्ति name of a work on gra-
mmar by इत़िदव which is mention-
ed by Al Beruni.
शास् (l) case affix ( स् ) of the accu-
sative plural;cf. स्वौजसमौट्शास्o P.IW.
1.2; (2) tad.affix applied to words
, meaning much or little as also to
a numeral: e.g. बहुतां ददाति, अल्पशेी
द्दति, द्विशा:, त्रिळा:, पादाः etc., cf.
P. V.4.42, 43. v

इांकरी
360
इाकलप्रतिषेध
L--------
इळांकरी () name of a glo:s of! Konda-
bhatta's Wikarabhaa
by Srhkara; (2) na*** of a corm*
mentary on !9 Paribhasendu-
Bhara of Ng9 written by
5ankarabhatta () The Vyakarama
vidya or instructions in Grammar
given by CB 5a to Paini O?
hich the Sik of Pin has been
based. _
इाकट a tad. af* added optionally
< क्कन to the words and
thers in the sense of a field pro-
aucing the thin8ः * 8 इक्षुद्रकेटम्
6. P.V.2.29.
(1) name of an ancient reT
puted scholar of Grammar and
Pºkhyas who s quoted by
Prini. He is despisingly referred
to by Patajali a् ? traitor gra-
तैmrian sympathing with the
Namktas 6r etymologs! in hold-
ing the view that ail substantives
aderivable and ca? be derived
from roots cf तत्र नामान्याख्यातजनीति
इकटायने नैरुक्तसमय Nir.I.12: cf also
क्षेत्रानुजेनेोहं निरुक्ते व्युतूपे मूर्ती
तकम् M. Bh on P.I II.3.1. Sakat्-
yana is believed to have been the
author of the Undisitraptha
ag also of the RkTantra Pratisakhya
86 the Sव्रmaveda ; (2) **** of a
• Jain grammaran jamed पाल्यकीर्ति
ईक्टून who jived in the minth
century during the reign of the
R्raktaking Amoghavara and
्e the Sabdanusana which is
much similar to the Satraptha of
Panini and introduced a new Sys!
em of Grammar: His work named
he Sabdnussana consists offour
chapters whichar arranged in the
orm of topics, which % named
सुरिद्व. The grammar work is called
इच्दानुशासन
|्टायेनतरङ्गिणी a commentary 9P
\ Skayama's Sabdanusana.
:
|
t
|
ज्ञाकटायनव्याकरण the
grammar written
See इकटाथन.
इकटायनश्ाब्दानुशासन name of the
्atie chT grammar written by
पाल्यकीर्ति-इाक्रटायन.
treatise on
by Sakatayana.
इकपार्थिवादि a class of irregular
saranadhikarana , Sansa% %
Kanadhrayacompound for**
tions, where according '? the
sense conveyed by the compound
word, a word afte the first word
or so has to be taken s omitted;
समानाधिकरणाधिकार इाक्पार्थिवादी-
नामुपसंख्यानमुत्तरपुदलेपश् वर्त्! इाक्रभेाजी
तैर्देवैः ， कुतपवाळाः ौतः
कुतेतैतः	य््ने् यष्टिमद्वल्य:
रं. 6n P.II.!.69 Vart- ?
ara ancient writer of Nirपृ*t?
् is duoted bysk: cf. विद्युत्
तडिद्भवतीतिं दाकपूणि Nir. III. 1, or
¶ जेर्हतीति मूह्यानेति दृक्पूः
K. II. 13 or ऋचक्रुम् ! ईरणः |
त्रेर्तीति शाकपूणिः Nirlll!*
इाकळ a word frequently uscd in the
Mahbhsya for a grammatical
operation of injunction ( विधि )
हं, crms a specific feature of
thegrammar of्कृञ्य vi%. that the
vowels इ, उ,ऋ, and ळ remain with*
out phonetical combination and a
्ening of them f they are
16ag:cf.इक्रोsसवर्ण शाकल्यस्य तां P.VH.
i. 127: ईाकब्यय इदं शुक्रम्! cf. also
M.Bh. on P.VI.1-77 VI.1.125,Vt.
1.27:VI.2.52, VI1-3-3 and VIII.
108: (2) pupils gf ् cf.
तै् ळोत्रं:दाकेला: M. Phः% P.
V.i.18 (3) a villagein the Vahika
astrict: cf. 1्कलं नु|म वार्हीकग्राम: M.
BonTV.2.104 Vrt %
<rक्|ूलप्रकृतिभाव absence of a phonet9
्lecence ( प्रकृतिभाव ) a? speci-
3.auly mentioned by दकि्: See
ज्ञाक्रल.
||ृतिषेध prohibition " "*

इााकल्य
361
इाङ्गरवाद्ि
coalescence of any of the vowels
इ, उ, ऋ and ल with any dissimilar
vowel following it. See ढाकछ.
शाकल्य name of an ancient gra-
mmarian and Vedic scholar who
is supposed to have revised the
Vedic texts and written their
Pada-ptha. He is often quoted by
Paini and the writers of the
Pratisakhya works: cf. इाकल्यस्य संहृि-
तामनुप्रावर्षत् M. Bh. on P.I.4.84; als6
on P.I.1.18, IV. 1.18; cf. also
उपचारं लक्षणतश्च सिद्धे अाचाय क्यालेञ्ाक्र-
ल्यगाग्र्या: R.Pr.XIII.12.
शाकिन tad. affix (originally a word
formed from √ाकी by affixing न as
given in M. Bh. on P.V.2.100),
applied to the word इक्षु in the
sense of a field producing it: e. g.
इक्षुढाकिनम्.; cf. भवने क्षत्रे इक्ष्बादिभ्यैः
शाक्रटशक्रिन Ks. on P. V. 2.29.
शाखादि a class of words headed by
the word शाखा which haye the
taddhita affix य added to them in
the sense of इव i.e. similarity: e.g.
शांख्य:, मुख्यः, जघन्यः etc.: cf. Kas. on
P. V.3.103.
शानच्ट् (1) krt affix ( अान ) substituted
for the Atmanepada लट् affixes, to
which म् is prefixed if the base
before the affix ends in अ: e. g. |
एघमान, विद्यमान, etc; cf P. III. 2.
124, 125, 126; (2) Vikarana affix
( अान ) substituted for श्रा before
the personal ending हि of the impe-
rative second person singular, if
the preceding root ends in a con-
sonant: e. g. पुषाण, मुषण, cf. P. III.
1. 83.
राानन् krt affix (आन) substituted for
the Atmampada affixes instead of
शान्, prescribed after the roots पू
and यज्; the application ofशानन् for
शानच् is for the acute accent on the
initial vowel of the root;e.g. पवमानः
इाब्द्
with the acute accent on the initial
46
vowel as contrasted with विद्यमान:
with the acute accent on the last
vowel: cf. P. III. 2.128.
राान्तनव an ancient scholar of gra-
mmar who wrote a treatise known
as the Phit sitras on accents.
शाब्द्बोध verbal interpretation; the
term is generally used with refe-
rence to the verbal interpretation
of a sentence as arising from that
of the words which are all conne-
cted directly or indirectly with the
verb-activity. It is defined as
पदजन्यपदार्थापास्थातजन्यबोध:. According
to the grammarians, verbal
activity is the chief thing in a
sentence and all the other words
(excepting the one which expresses
verbal activity) are subordinated
to the verbal activity and hence
are connected with it; cf. पदज्ञानं तु
करणं द्वारे तत्र पदार्थधीः | शाब्दबोधः फलं तत्र
ढाक्तिधीः सहृकारिणी | मुक्तावली III.81.
इाब्द्बोधतरङ्गिणीं a treatise on the
theory of verbal import written
by ईश्वरानन्द
a treatise on the
theory of ढाब्दबोघ written by रामाके-
शोरचक्रवर्तिन्.
इाब्द्बोधवाद् theory of verbal import
or congnition; the theories to be
noted in this respect are those of
the Grammarians, the Naiyayikas
and the Mimarhsakas, according to
whom verb-activity, agent, and
injunction stand respectively as
the principal factors in a sentence.
Vikarana affix ( आय) substitut-
ed for the Vikarana श्रा in Wedic
Literature; e. g, ग्रभाय जिह्वया मधु cf
K. on P. III I. 84.
इाङ्गरवादि a classof words headed by
he word ज्ञाङ्गरव which take the
feminine affix ई ( डेन्) making the
initial vowel of the word(to which
ई of the feminine is added) an

झालळ
362
शिक्षा
acute-accented one: e.g: इङ्गिरवी ;cf.
इाङ्गरवाद्यने डीन् P, IV. 1.73.
इाळच् tad. affix इाल applied to
the prefix वि in the sense of the
base itself ( स्वार्थे ). See इङ्कटच्.
इाालातुरीय name of the great gra-
mmarian Panini given to him on
account of his being an inhabitant
of ढालातुर् an old name of the
modern Lahore or a name of a
place near Lahore; cf. P IV.3.14
शाश्वतिक eternal or permanent, as
contrasted with कार्यi. e. produced;
cf.एतस्मिन्वाक्ये इन्दुमैत्रेययेो: शाश्वतिकं विरोधः
Siradeva Pari.36; cf also एके वर्णौञ्ज
शाश्वतिकान् न कार्यान् R.Pr.XIII.4.
शारू scientific treatment of a sub-
ject; a system of thoughts giving
a scientific treatment of any sub-
ject. The word is applied to the
rules of Panini and sometimes to
an individual rule: cf. इास्त्रबाधा
or अदाखबाघ or विप्रतिषेध्ााख्न,frequently
used by the commentators: cf न हिं
|्देहादलक्षणं दास्रामेत्यर्थः NageSa's Par.
Sek. on Pari. 1; cf. पदान्तदिष्वेव
विक्रार्ाास्त्रम् R.Pr.II.2.
इााख्छत् the originator or the founder
of a Sastra or system of particular
thoughts. The word was used by
ancient grammarians for Panini,
the founder of the great system of
grammar, or of grammar in gene-
ral; cf. व्यत्ययमिच्छति शास्त्रकृदेषां सोपि च
सिध्यति बाहुलकेन M.Bh. om P. III. 1.
85.
इखच्फत brought about by a rule:
brought about by the science of
grammar; cf दास्त्रकृतो येोमश्च Nir.I.
2; cf. also काचच्च संनिपातकृतमानन्तर्य
शास्त्रकृतमनानन्तर्यम् M.Bh. on P. VII.
3.54, VIII.2.38.
शाख्नह्यानि harm or injustice to a
science; i.e. mon-application of a
rule although it could apply,there
, being no prohibition for it; cf.
ढास्रह्यानिश्च l समुदायैकाचः शास्त्रं हृीयते M.
Bh. on P. VI.1.I Vart. 12.
शास्त्रातिदेशा supposition of the original
in the place of the substitute mere-
ly for the sake of the application
of a grammatical rule as con-
trasted with रूपातिदश, the actual
restoration of the original form;
cf. किं पुनरयं दख्नातदे|्:	तृची
यच्छास्त्रं तदार्ताद्यते , आहोस्विदूपातिदेशाः
तृवो यदूपं तदतिदिश्यते M. Bh. on P.
VII.1.95.
श्ााखाथै the purpose ofa rule of gra-
mmar; cf. अतोत्राप्यवयवन दाखाथे:
संप्रतीयत M.Bh. on P.VI.1.84 Vart.
5: cf. also, तद्यथा ] लेके वसन्ते ब्राह्मणेा-
ग्रनिादधीतेति सकृदाधाय कृतः शास्त्रार्थ इति
पुनः प्रवृत्तिने भवति ! M. Bh. on VI.1.
84 Vart. 3; VI.4.104 Vart. 3.
्ााखासिद्धत्व thesupposed invalidity of
a rule or a set ofrules by virtue of
the dictum laid down by Panini in
पूर्वत्रासिद्धम् VIII.2.1: cf. शास्त्रासेद्धत्वमनेन
क्रियेत सः एकांदेद्दाद्यास्त्रं तुक्शास्त्र असिद्धं भवति |
M.Bh. on P.VI.1.86 Vart. 5.
रिा caseaffix इ substituted for the
case-affixes जस् and इस् of the nom.
pl. and the acc. pl. in the neuter
gender: cf. जद्दासीं: दिः P. VII. 1.20.
This afix ओ is called सर्वनामस्थान
just like the first five case- affixes
in the masculine and fem. gender.
This case affix is secn dropped in
Vedic passages; cf. ईच्छन्दसि बहुलं
( ळोप: ) P. VI. 1.70.
शिक्षा general name given to a work
on Phonetics. Although there are
many such works which are al!
called इिाक्षा, the work, which is
oftem referred to, by the word, is
the Siks named पाणिनीयाशक्षा, about
the authorship of which,
however, there is a doubt
whether it was the work of Pinini
or of somebody belonging to his
school. The Siks works are help-

fोखा
ful, no doubt, for the study of
grammar, but no topic belonging
to Siksa is given by Panini which
apparently means that these works
do not come under the subject or
province of Grammar.The reason
why the Siks topics are not given
by Panini, is worth consideration.
These Siks works are not speci-
fically related to a particular Veda
and it cannot be said whether
they preceded or succeeded the
PratiSakhya works.
शिखा one of the subdivisions of the
artificial recitals of the Vedic texts.
शिाट् a term for सर्वनामन् (a pronoun) in
the works of ancientgrammarians;
cf. स्वाङ्गक्रिीटमिदन्तानाम् Phip Sitra 29,
where रिट् is explained as सर्वनामन्
in the gloss.
शित् possessed of, or characterized
by, the indicatory letter -ं: the
krt affixes which are marked with
the indicatory ， are termed Sarva-
dhatuka affixes (cf. P.III,4.113),
while, the Adesas or substitutes,
marked with the indicatory , are
substituted for the whole of the
Sthanim or the original and not for
its fimal letter according to the
rule अलेान्त्यस्य P. I.1.52; e. g. इि is |.
substituted,not for the final सु ofजस्
and ढासु but for the whole जसु and
' the whole दासु: cf. P.I.1.55.
रिारस्य produced at the top of the
orifice, cerebral.
शिरोमणिभट्टाचाये a grammarian who
wrote the grammatical works
कारक्रविंवक, तद्वितीर्ण्ण and तिडन्तशिरोमणि,
रिावभढ a grammarian, who wrote a
commentary named कुङ्कुमविकास on
the Padamanjari of Haradatta. He
was the grandson of Nilakantha
.Dikgita:who.was also . a gramma-
rian and who wrote an indepen-
368
शिवराम ( चक्रवर्ती )
|ृिष्ठ
dent work on the Paribhass,
named the Paribhsvrtti.
a grammarian
who wrote a commentary on the
Katantraparisista called the
Siddhantaratnahkura.
ऋिवर्मन्द्र ( सरस्वती ) a grammarian
who wrote (1) a gloss on the
stºtras of Panini, (2) a commen-
tary named सिद्धान्तरत्नाकर on the .
Siddhantakaumud, and (3) : a
commentary on the Mahabhasya
mamed Mahabhasyapraksa.
शिवस्त्र mame given to the fourteen
small stras giving the alphabet
which Panini took as the basis of
his grammar. The Sivastras have ;
got a well-known explanation in
Verse,named नन्दिकेश्वरकारिका on which
there is a commentary of the type
of Bhasya by उपमन्यु. The origin of
the Sivastra given by the writer
of the Krik is summed up in the
stanza - वृत्तावसाने नटराजराजो ननाद
ढक्ां नवपञ्श्ववारम् , उद्धर्तुकामः सनकादि-
सिद्धनतद् विमई दिवसूत्रजालम् | Nand. 1.
रिावादे a big class of about ninety
words headed by the word शिव !
which have the tad. affix अ ( अणु )
added to them in the sense of a
descendant ( अपत्य ) in spite of
other affixes such as इ|्, ण्यत् and
others prescribed by other rules,
which sometimes do not take
place, or do so optionally e ड-
शैवः: ताक्ष्ण:, ताक्षण्यः; गाङ्ग: गङ्गय:, .
गङ्गायन:: cf Kas. on P.IV.1.112.
This class is looked upon as अकर्त-
गण and a word is supposed to be .
included in this class, when the ;
affix अ is noticed in spite of some
other affix being applicable by
some other rule. _
इिाट (1) cultured and learned people
* who want to speak c98cty and
' who thereforehawe studied 8Fa*

शिष्टप्रयेाग 364 शुद्धाद्युबोधस्त्रार्थव्याकरण
mmar; cf. के पुनः इिाष्टा:	वैयाकरणाः | द्युङ्कयजु:प्रातिशाख्य name of the
कुत एतत् ' इास्त्रपूर्वक्रा हि द्विवैियाकरणाश्च
इास्त्रज्ञा: | M. Bh. on P. VI. ].109;
(2) enjoined, prescribed: cf. धिपयैयेा
धुवाशष्टेSपरेषाम् , R.Pr.VI.120.
रिाष्ट ्रयेाग the forms of words used by
the learned people; the expression
used by such persons: cf. स न्ववद्यं
ईिष्टप्रयोग उपास्यः	M. Bh. on P.I.3.
1 Vart. 13. _
शेष्टव्यख्यान explanation (of doubtful
things or expressions) given by the
learned people.
शिष्यहिता ( वृति) a work on grammar
written by उग्रभूति of which a men-
tion is made by Al Beruni in his
work.
शी (1) case affix (ई) substituted for
the nom. pl. affix जस् (अस् ) in
the declension of the pronouns,
when the affix जस् is preceded by
the vowel अ: e.g. सर्वे, विश्व; cf. Kव्र8.
on PVII.1.17: (2) case affix (ई )
substituted for औौ of the nom.and
the acc.dual after fem. bases end-
ing in औ, as also after bases in
the neuter gender; e. g.खई रमे; कुण्ड,
, वन; cf. Ks on P. VII.1.18, 19.
शास्रतर lit.over-rapid an extra quick-
ness of breath (प्राण) which charac-
terizes the utterance of a sibilant
which has got one more property
viz. ऊष्मत्व in addition to the three
properties (बाह्यप्रयत्न ) possessed by
the other consonants: cf. ढीव्रतरं
सोष्मसु प्राणमेके	R. Pr. XIII. 6.
a person reciting Vedic passa-
ges more rapidly, when his recital
results into a fault of utterance.
इीर्षण्य principal; chief ; the word is
used in connection with the uttera-
nce of Veda passages which are
uttered loudly at the time of the
third pressing ( तृतीयसवन ): cf. इिारत
तारम् T. Pr.XXIII.12;cf. इत़ि्ण्यः स्वरः
M.Bh. on P. VI,l.61.
Pratisakhya treatise pertaining to
the White Yajurveda which is also
called the Vajasaneyi-Pratisakhya.
This work appears to be a later one
as compared with the other Prati-
Sakhya works and bears much
similarity with some of the Stºtrag
of Panini. It is divided into eight
chapters by the author and it
deals with letters, their origin and
their classification, the euphonic
and other changes when the Sarh-
hit text is rendered into the Pada
text,and accents.The work appears
to be a common work for all the
different branches of the White
Yajurveda, being probably based
on the individually different Prati-
sakhya works of the different
branches of the Shukla Yajurveda
composed in ancient times. Katy3-
yana is traditionally believed to
be the author of the work and very
likely he was the same Katyayana
who wrote the Warttikas on the
Sutras of Panini.
शुण्डिकादि a class of words headed by
शुाण्डक्रा to which the taddhita affix
अ ( अण् ) is added in the sense of
*who has come from'; e.g. दौण्डिक:,
क्रार्कणः: cf. Kas. on P. IV. 3.76.
बुद्ध pure, unmixed; the term is used
(I) in connection with a vowel
which is not nasalized ( अनुनासिक);
cf. भाव्यमानेन सवर्णानां ग्रहृणं नेतेि शुद्धो-
यमुचार्यत, Kas. on P. VII.1.85; as
also, (2) in connection with words
which are used in their primary
sense and not in any secondary
sense: cf. शुद्धानां पठितानां संज्ञां कर्तव्या ;
संज्ञोपसर्जनीभूतानि न सर्वादीनि M.Bh. on
P.I.1.27 Wrt. 3.
व्याकरण a gloss on the
Asubodha-grammar, written by
a grammarian named Rameईvara

_
शुभ्राांदं
शुभ्रादि a class of words headed by
the word शुभ्र to which the tadd-
hita affix एय ( ढक् ) is added in
the sense of a dc scendant in spite |
ofother affixes being prescribed
by some other rules which some-
times are added optionally with
this एय; e.g. द्रौभ्रय:, वैधवेय: रौहिणेयः.
This class is looked upon as अाकृति-
गण and hence if this affix एय is
seen applied although not p escri-
bed actually as in the word गङ्गय,
the word is supposed to have bcen
included in this class: cf. P. IV.
365
1.123.
शन utterance with a swollen mouth
which is looked upon as a fault of
Vedic recital: cf. दुटे मुखेन सुषिरेण नूनम्
R.Pr.XIV.2._. अ!
शेरसिंह name of a grammarian who
wrote a gloss named दीपिका on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana.
् case-endir.g seen in Vedic Litera-
ture substituted for any one of
the 2l case-endings as found in
Vedic Language; words ending in
this ई ( ए ) are not coalesced with
a vowel that follows; e.g अस्म इन्द्र- |
वृहस्पतौ: cf. P.VII..1.39 and I.1.13. ]
इष (l) any other senses than what
are given above; cf. इष P.IV.2.92:
(2) surname of a repuced family
of grammarians belonging to
Southern India which produced
many grammarians, from the
fifteenth century to the eighteenth
century. Ramacandra Sesa wasthe
first grammarian in the family
who wrote the Prakriyakaumud
in the fifteenth century. His des-
cendants developed the system of
studying grammar by the study of
topics as given in the Prakriya
Kaumudi and wrote several works
of the nature of glosses and com-
[ments,
शेत्ययन
रेषिछष्ण one of the promiment gra-
mmarians belonging to the Sesa
family, who was the son ofनरासेहुईौघ.
He wrote a gloss on the Prakriy्-
kaumud and two small works
Prakrtacandrik and Padacan-
drik. Two other minor grammar
works viz. the YafilugantaSiromani
and Upapadamatiisitravyakhyana
are ascribed to ईौषकृष्ण who may be
the same as शेषकृष्ण the son of नरसिंहृ,
or another, as there were many
persons who had the name Krsha
in the big family.
शेषचक्रपाणि a grammarian of the
Sesa family who wrote a small
treatise on case- relations named
कारकतत्व.
इषशार्भन् also known by the name
मनीषिशेष्ार्मन् ,a grammarian who has
written सर्वमङ्गला, a commentary on
NageSa's Paribhasendusekhara.
शेषशाखत्री a grammarian who wrote a
commentary on the Paribh-
sendusekhara of Nagesabhatta. .
शेषाद्रि a grammarian of the seven-
teenth century who has written a
work, Paribhsabhaskara, on the
Paribhgs of the Panini system;
the treatise is written in the
manner ofSiradeva's Paribhavrtti
which has been taken as a basis
by him.
शेष षष्ठी the genitive case used
in any other senses than those
given in the specific rules. The
expression शष षष्ठी भविष्यति is often
found in commentary works.
शैत्यायेन an ancient Grammarian and
Vedic scholar who is quoted in
the Taittiriya Pratisakhya for
recommending a sharp and dis-
tinct nasalisation of the anusvara
and the fifth class-consonants; cf.
तत्रतरमानुनासेक्यमनुरूवारोत्तमेषु इति दैत्यायन:
T. Pr. XVII. 1. _

ईशोरीय
366
इयन्
ईौशोरीय recital of the Rgveda in
the school named after SiSira, a
pupil of Sakalya.'
ईोषिक remaining, or remnant; the
term is used with reference to
a tad. affix prescribed in senses
other than those mentioned before
the rule इष P. IV. 2.92; cf. शैषि-
कान्मतुबर्थीयाच् चैाषकी मतुबर्थक: | सरूपः
प्रत्ययी नैष्ट: सन्नन्तान्न सनिष्यत !
इोण्डादि a class of words headed by
the word द्दौण्ड which are compo-
unded with a noun in the locative
case to form a locative tatpurusa
compound: e. g-_अक्षौाण्ड, अक्षधूतै: |
etc.: cf. Kas. on P.II.1.40.
ईौनक a great ancient Vedic scholar
who is believed to have written
the Rk. Pratisakhya, which is said
to be common for the two main
branches of the Rgveda but which
at present represents, in fact, all
the different branches of the
Rgveda.
|ातेशाख्य a popular name of
the well-gnown Prtisakhya of the
Rgveda, named ऋक्प्रातशाख्य as well
as ऋग्वेदप्रातिशाख्य.
ईौनकादि a class of words headed by
the word ईौनक to which the tadd-
hita affix इन् ( णिनि ) is added in
the sense of*instructed by', provi-|
ded the word so formed is a por-
tion of what is looked upon as a
part of the sacred Vedic Litera-
ture; cf. शौनकेन श्रोक्तमधीयते इौनक्रिन:,
वाजसनायन: cf Kas. on P.IV. 3.106.
*बुत्व the substitution of the palatal
consonants ग्,च्,,ज्, and ऊल् respec-
tively for the similar consonants
स्, त् , श्रु , द् , ध् and न् of the dental
class;cf. स्तेः श्चुना श्चु: P.VIII.4.10.
ूितप् the syllable ति applied to the
., Vikarana-ending form of a root
to denote a root for a gramma-
tical operation The specific men-
tion of a root with श्तिप् added,
shows that the root of the parti-
cular class or conjugation shown, is
to be taken and not the same root
belonging to any other conjuga-
tion; cf. इक्ातपौ धातुनिर्दशे: e.g.
अस्यतिवक्तिख्यातिभ्योs ङ्क P.III. 1. 52.
Although operations prescribed for
a primary root are applicable to a
frequentative root when the fre-
guentative sign य has been omitt-
ed, operations prescribed for a
root which is stated in a rule with
ति ( दितप् ) added to it, do not take
place in the frequentative roots;cf.
तिपा शपानुबन्धन ... पञ्चैतानि न यड्डके.
श्रम a vikarana or conjugational
sign of the agama type to be inse-
rted after the last vowel of the
roots of the seventh conjugation
( रुधादि ): e.g. रुणद्वि, भिनत्ति etc.; cf.
रुधादिभ्यः श्रम् P.III.1.78.
श्f a vikarana or conjugational sign
of the ninth conjugation, to be
added to roots headed by क्रीं be-
fore the Sarvadhatuka affixes; e.g.
क्रीणाति; cf. क्र्यादिभ्य: क्षा.P.III.1.81. श्रा
is added optionally with श्रु ( नु ) to
the roots स्तम्भ्, स्तुम्भ्, स्कम्भ् , स्कुम्म् and
स्कु. e.g.स्तश्नाति, रुतनीति, स्कुन्नाति, स्कुनीति
etc : cf. P.III.1.82.
भु a vikarana or a conjugational
sign to be placed after the roots
headed by सु (i.e. roots of the fifth
conjugation) as also after the root
धु when ) is to be changed into
श्ट, and the roots अ， and तक्ष्; e.g.
सुनीति, सुनुते, cf. स्वादिभ्यः श्रु: P.III.
l.73. It is also added optionally
with श्रा to the roots स्तम्भ्, ख्तुम्भ् etc.
See श्रा.
इयन् a vikaratha or conjugational sign
of the fourth conjugation added
to roots headed by दिव्, before the
Srvadhatuka affixes; e.g.. दीव्यति,
' पुष्यति, etc. 1्यन् is added optionall

श्रद्धा
367
_s
श्रुत
5
with इाप् (अ) to the roots भ्राद्, भ्रम् ,
म् and others, as also to यस्
श्रद्धा a technical term for noun-
stems ending in अ in the feminine
gender used in the Katantra Gra-
famar; cf. अा श्रद्धा Kat. II. 1.10.
श्रमणादि a class of words headed by
the word श्रमणा with which words
in the masculine or the feminine
gender are compounded when they
ईand in apposition cf. कुमारी श्रमण
कुमारश्रमणा, युवां अध्यापकः युवाध्यापक:K.
on P.II.1.70.
श्रवण hearing of a phonetic element
or a word in the actual speech;
audition; cf. तस्य चोदात्तस्वरितपरत्वे श्रवणं
स्पष्टम् S. K. on P.I.2.32. In many
technicalgrammatical terms,affixes
and substitutes, there is sometimes
a portion of them which is not a
vital part of the word, but it is for
the sake of causing certain pre-
scribed grammatical operations.
The lettersor syllables which form
such a portion are called इत् and
they are only for the sake ofgra-
mmatical operations (कार्यार्थ ), as
contrasted with the other ones
which are actually heard (श्रुत्यर्थे or
श्रवणार्थ ).
श्रावन् lit. that which is heard; cf.
श्रवणं श्रावः भव घञ् " सोस्यास्तीति श्रावी
Nyasa on Kas. V.2.37. The term
is used in connection with anaffix
for which no elision is prescribed
and hence which remains and is
" heard: cf. संशथ श्रावणं वक्ष्यति M. Bh.
' on P.V.2.37; Ks. on P. V.2.37.
श्रीकणोक्त a grammarian who has
written a small treatise on cor-
rupt words or ungrammatical
words,which is named अपदाब्दखण्डन.
श्रीघर a grammarian of the last
century who has written a com-
, mentary named श्रीघरी after him,
on the Paribhasendusekhara.
श्रीघरी name of a commentary on
the Paribhisendusekhara written
.!y Sridhara. See श्रीधर
श्रेींनवास a grammarian who has
written a commentary on the Pa-
ribhsabhaskara of Haribhskara
श्रीमणिकण्ठ a famous grammarian
who held the titles मह्यमहंपाध्याय,
प्रगल्भतर्कसंह and भट्टाचायै and who has
written a systematic work on case-
relations named कारकखण्डनमण्डन; the
work is also known by the name
षट्कारकखण्डनमण्डन.
श्रीमान्ार्मा a famous grammarian of
Eastern India who has written a
short scholarly gloss named Vijaya
on NigeSa's Paribhisendusekhara.
For details refer to Paribhasa-
sangraha.
श्रुत lit. what is actually heard; the
word is used in connection with
such statements as are made by the
authoritative grammarians, Panini
and the Warttikakara by their actual
utterance or wording,as contrasted
with such dictums as can be de-
duced only from their writings. cf.
श्रुतानुभितंथः श्रौतः संबन्धो बलीयन्. Par.
Sck Pari. 104.
श्रुतकेवालेन् a term of a very great
honour given to such Jain monks
as have almost attained perfec-
tion; the term is used in connec-
tion with Plyakirti Sakatyana,
the Jain grammarian शाकटायन,
whose works ढाकटायनशब्दानुशासन and
its presentation in a topical form
named शाकटायनप्रक्रिया are studied
at the present day in some parts
of India. See इाकटायन above.
श्रुति () lit hearing sound.cf. श्रुतौ च
रूपग्रहृणम् M. Bh. on P. I. 2.64; per-
ception, as a proof contrasted
wih inference;cf. ननु च श्रुतिकृतेपि
पदेस्ति M. Bh. on P. VII. 1.72
Vart. 1; cf. also M. Bh. on P.

श्रुतिसामान्य
VIII. 2.25; cf also तस्मादुच्चतीनि
R. T. 61; (2) authoritative word;
the word is sometimes used in
connection with the utterances cf
the Sitrakaras wiz. the Sitra.
श्रतिसामान्य common hearing com>
"mon form of technically different
wordings, such as अा of टाप,.डाम्
and चाप् feminine affixes, or ई of
डप्, डब्, and डीन् fem. affixes; cf. र
इति श्रुतिसामान्यमुपादीयते Ks.on P.VIII.
2.18: cf. also Kas. on VIII. 2.42
and WIII. 4,1.
शूयमाण heard, presented; cf. द्वन्द्वान्ते
श्यमाणः इब्दः प्रत्येकमभिसंबध्यते; cf थ्यमा-
णपि नुमि स्वरो भवति • पञ्चत्रपुणा M. Bh.
on P. VII. 1. 73.
श्रण्याद्ि a class of words headed by
the word श्रणि, which are com-
pounded with words like कृत if ]
they stand in apposition, provided
the word so compounded has got
the sense of the affix वि i. e.
having become what was not
before: cf. अश्रेणयः श्रणय: कृताः श्रेणिकृता:,
एककृता: Kas, on P. II. 1. 59.
श्लथबन्ध a loose connection as obtain-
ing between the warious words in
the Pada recital, as contrasted
with श्लिष्टबन्ध in the Safimhita text.
श्लिष्ट or श्लिष्टवन्ध compact arrange-
ment as seen in the Samhita text.
्ठ a term used in the sense of eli-
sion or lopa in the case of the
affix दाप् when it is elided after the
roots headed by हु, i. e. roots of
the third conjugation as also after
any root wherever it is so seen in
the Vedic Literature: cf. बहुलं छन्दसि
P. III. 4. 76. This ङ isTooked
upon as a substitute zero, or nil
for the general vikarana इाप् in the
case of these roots; cf. जुहोत्यादिभ्यः
*ठ: P. II. 4. 75. The specific
feature of this elision of the vika-
rana दाप् by means of the term श्रेष्ठ,
368
%वास
is that it causes reduplication of
the roots to which it is added: cf.
छकिं प्रकृते श्चुटविधानं द्विर्वचनार्थम् Kas, on.
P. II. 4. 75 and P. III. 1. 10.
रट्ठवद्भाव treatment as before the
elision named ठ, i. e- reduplica-
tion of the preccding root. This
*ठवद्भाव is prescribed in the case of
the roots भी, हृी, भ्ठ and हु: cf भीहृी-
भृहुवां श्छवच P. III. 1. 39. _
इळविकरण roots characterized by the
addition or application of the
conjugational sign which is
elided by the use of the term बु
for elision; roots of the third con-
jugation; cf. य एते ठावक्ररणा: श्लुवि-
करणाश्च M.Bh.on P.III. 1.67 Vart,2,
as also on P. III 1. 91.
रळविधि the specific operation caused
by श्लु viz.the reduplication for the
preceding root; cf. तत्र ढाके श्लु-
' विधिप्रतिषेध:, M. Bh. on P. I. 1. 62
Wart. 6.
_ _Mp __ _
श्लोकवाांतंक Varttika or supplemen-
tary rule to Panini's rules laid
down by scholars of grammar
immediately after Pahimi, com-
,posed in verse form. These
Slokavarttikas are quoted in the
Mahabhasya at various places and
supposed to have been current in
the explanations of Panini's Asg-
dhyay in the days of Patanjali.
The word is often used by later
COmmentators.
श्वस्तनी a term of ancient gramma-
rians for the first future called
छट् by Panini; cf. परिदेवने श्वस्तनी
भविष्यन्त्यर्थे ' इयं नु कदा गन्ता यैवं पादै
निदधाति M. Bh. on P. III. 3.15.
*वास् lit. breath; the voiceless breath
required for uttering some letters;
the term is used in the Pratis्-
khya and Vyakarana books in the
sense ofbreath which is promi-
mently required in the utterance

वेासानुप्रदान
369
of the hard consonants, sibilants,
visarga and the Jihvamliya and
Upadhmaniya letters , the term is
used in connection with
letters also; the usual term in use
is, of course, श्वासानुप्रदान, the term
श्वास showing the property of the
breath, with which these letters
are characterized.
*वासानुप्पदान caused by the emission
of breath; the term is used in con-
trast with नादानुप्रदान in connection
with hard consonants,surds, visar-
ga,the Uihvamuliya and the Upadh-
maniya letters: see श्वास above.
श्वीभूतवृत्ति a grammatical work of
the type of a gloss on the Stitras
of Panini written by an ancient
grammarian श्धीभ्रति mentioned in
the Mahabhasya; cf. स्तेाष्याम्यहं
पादिक्रमेदवाहिं ततः श्वेाभूत इातनीं पातनीं वं
M- Bh. on P. I.1.57. Possibly
the grammarian धीभूति is referred
to in the word श्वेोभूत in the verse.
ष
ष (l) a sibilant letter of the cerebral
class ofconsonants possessed of the
properties श्वास, अघोष, कण्ठविवार and
महाप्राण ; (2) mute indicatory letter ब्,
attached to nouns as also to affixes
with which nouns are formed,
such as ष्बुन्, ष्कन्, ष्टरज्ञ, ष्ट्रन् etc.
showing the addition of the femi-
nine affix ई ( डीष् ); cf. षिद्भ्रादिभ्यश्च
P. IV. 1.41 ; (3) changeable to स्
when placed at the beginning of
roots in the Dhatupagha except in
the case of the roots formed from
nouns and the roots ष्ठिव् and ष्वष्क्;
(4) substitute for the last conso-
nant of the roots व्रश्च, भ्रस्ज्, खज्, मृज्,
यज्, राज्, भ्राज्, as also of the
roots ending in च् and ， be-
fore a consonant excepting a nasal
and a semivowel, as also when the
47
these |
consonant is at the end of the
word; e. g. भ्रधा, स्रष्टा, यष्टुम् सम्राट् etc.
cf P. VIII.2.36 (5) substitute for
a visarjaniya preceded by a vowel
except अ and followed by a conso-
mant of the guttural or the labial
class which does not begin a diff-
erent word, as also before the
words पाश, कल्प, क, काम्य etc. cf. P.
VIII. 3.39: cf. also P. VIII 3.4],
43, 44, 45 and 48 for some speci-
fied cases; (6) substitute for स् when
placed near a consonant of the
cerebral class or near the conso-
nant =ं: e. g. वृक्षषण्ड, वृक्षष्टकार: Kas.
on P. VIII. 4.41.
(1) consonant ष् , the vowel अ be-
ing added for facility of pronunci-
ation;(2) compound-ending अ,sub-
stituted for the final of the word
मूर्धन् at the end of a Bahuvrihi
Compound when the word मूर्धन् is
preceded by द्वि or त्र e. g. द्विम्धेः,
त्रिमूर्धः cf. द्वित्रिभ्यां ष मूर्तः P, V. 4.115
(3)a technical term for तत्पुरुषसमास
in the.jainendra Wyakarana.
ष¶ the compound-ending ( समासान्त )
अ added for the final of the words
सक्थि, आक्षे and दारु standing at the
end of a Bahuvrihi compound
under specific conditions. e. g.
विशालाक्ष:,दीर्धसक्थ:, द्वयङ्गुलं ( दारु ): cf.
P. V. 4.113, 114.
षट्कारक (I) the six Krakas or instru-
ments of action,which are differ-
ently connected with the verbal
activity, viz. क, कमे, करण, सेप्रदान,
अपादान and अधिकरण; for details see
कारक above: cf. तत्र शाक्तमते द्रव्यस्य
कारकाख्यायामवान्तरव्यापारानेबन्धना षडुपाख्या
भबान्ति क्रतां कर्म करणं संप्रदानमपादानमधिकरणं
चति | Sringara Prakasa IV; (2) a
work of the name (षट्कारक) written
by a Jain grammarian Mahesa-
mandin.
षट्कारकखण्डनमण्डन known also as
केारकखण्डनमण्डन a grammar-work on

षट्कारकनिरूपण
न्र्
370
षष्ठी
the six case-relations written by
a scholar of grammar named
श्रीमणिकण्ठ,
षट्कारकनिरूपण a work dealing with
the six kinds of instruments of
the verbal activity ( krakas )
written by Trilokantha.
षट्कारकबालबोधिनी a short work in
verses on the six case-relations
written by a grammarian Prabhu-
dasa who has added his own
commentary to it.
a small work in verses
on the six case-relations ascribed
to Amarasirhha, but very likely the
author was Amaracandra a Jain
grammarian of the fifteenth cen-
tury. The work is also named
षट्कारकाबचार an anonymous smal
treatise on the six case-relations in
verse-form with a commentary.
_
षट्कारकविंवचन a small treatise on
the six case-relations written by
a grammarian Bhavananda who
held the title Siddhāntavgsa.
षडिकप्रस्ताव a popular name given
by grammarians to the topic of
grammar which deals with the
abbreviated popular forms of pro-
per nouns which are names of
persons, as for example the form
षडिक forषडङ्गुलिदत्त: cf. ठाजादादूवे
fद्वतयिादव: P. V. 3.83. _
षड्गचच् lit. a collection of six cows;
secondarily *a collection of six
animals or quadrupeds.The word
षड्गव was prescribed by later gra-
mmarians as a tad-affix by means
of a Vartika when they saw the
the word षड्गव used in language
after the word अश्व etc. e. g, अश्व-
षड्गवम्: cf. प्रकृत्यर्थस्य षट्वे षङ्गबलः Kas.
on P. V.2.29.
षड्भाषाचन्द्रिका a work on six dia-
lects written by a Jain grammar-
ian लक्ष्मणसूरि.
षण् a term used instead of the desi-
derative affix सन् prescribed by
P- III. 1.5 to 7, especially when
the र्त् of the affix is changed into
> as..for instange in तुदूषति etc.;
cf. रतीतेण्र्यन्तानां षण्भूत च सनि परतः अभ्या-
सदुत्तरस्य मूर्धन्यादेशो भवति Kas. on
स्तौतिण्योरेव षण्यभासात् P. VIII.3.61.
षत्व change of the consonant म् into
＾ in certain conditions in the
formation ofa word, or after pre-
positions in the case of verbs
beginning with सु. This cerebra-
lization of स् was a peculiar pho-
netic change which naturally occ-
urred when स् in utterance came
after a vowel excepting अ. Some
of the PratiSakhya works have ex-
haustively treated this change and
Paini has also mentioned many
rules in connection with it.
षष् ( षट् ) a technical term used in
Panini's grammar for such nume-
ral words ( संख्थाशब्द ) as cnd with
ष् or न e. g. ष्, पचन्, सप्तन् etc.;
cf. ष्णान्ता षट् P. I. ].24.
षष्ठ a term used in connection with
the sixth of the spirants viz. the
Jivhamiliya letter cf. ऋकारल्कारावथ
घष्ठ ऊष्मा R. Pr. I.18; the term is
also used in the sense of the sixth
vowel viz. ई. in the Rk. Prati-
sakhya: cf. मुख्ये पर पञ्चमषष्ठयोश्च R. Pr.
II. 29. -
षष्ठी the sixth case the genitive case.
This case is generally am ordinary
case or विभाक्त as contrasted with
कारकविभाक्त. A noun in the geni-
tive case shows a relation in gene-
ral, with another noun connected
with it in a sentence. Commen-
tators have mentioned many kinds
of relations denoted by the geni-
tive case and the phrase एकशतं
षष्ठ्यर्थाः (the genitive case ha

षष्ठीतत्पुरुष
87! षुक्
senses a hundred and one in all),.
is frequently used by gramma-
rians cf. बष्ठ ¶ P. II. 3.50; cf.
alsoबहुव्रो हि षष्ठ्यर्थाः स्वस्वाम्यनन्तरसमीपसमूहृ-
विकारावयवाद्यास्तत्र यावन्त: इवेदं संभवात
तेषु सर्वेषु प्रासषु नियमः क्रियते षष्ठी स्थानेयेोगा
इति | Ka8. on P. I. 1.49. The
genitive case is used in the sense
of any kraka when that kraka ;
is not to be considered as a karaka;
cf. कारकत्वेन अविवक्षित औषे षष्ठी भविष्यति.
A noun standing as a subject or
object of an activity is put in the
genitive case when that activity
is expressed by a verbal deriva-
tive , and not by a verb itself: cf.
क्कर्मणोः कृति P. II. : .65. For the
senses and use of the genitive
case, cf. P. II. 3.50 to 73.
षष्ठीतत्पुरुष a tatpurusa compound
with the first member (rarely the
second member as in the case of
अवयवतत्पुरुष ) in the genitive case.
The compound is very common
as prescribed in the case of a
word in the genitive case with
any other word connected with
it; e. g. राजपुरुषः, गुरुपत्नीं etc.: the
other tatpurusa compounds viz.
द्वितीयातत्पुरुष, तृतीयातत्पुरुष and others
prescribed in connection with
specific words or kinds of words.
The word षष्ठीसमास is also used in
this sense.
षष्ठीनिर्दिष्ट a word put in the genitive
case: a substitute given as con-
nected with a genitive case which
replaces the whole word which
is put in the genitive case unless
the substitute consists of a single
letter or is characterized by the
mute letter ड्, cf. षष्ठी स्थानेयोगा " अले-
न्त्यस्य | अनक्राहिज्ञात्सर्वेस्य etc. cf. P. I.
1.49 to 55.
षष्ठीसमास a compound word formed
by one noun with another in the
genitive case; see षष्ठीतत्पुरुष above-
षष्ठयर्थं sense of the genitive case,
which is a relation in general.
See षष्ठी above.
षकन्नु a krt affix applied to the roots
जल्प्, भिक्षु इ, उद् and दृ in the
sense of an agent, the mute
letter ष् signifying the addition of
the fem. affix डीषु e. g. जल्पाक:,
भिक्षाकः etc.; fem. base जल्पाक्री, वराक्री.
etc.; cf. P. III. 2.155.
षिकन् tad. affix इक added to the
word प्राथन् in the sense of * a stu-
dent of * or * a scholar of ' when
the word पथिन् is preceded by the
< word इति or षटि. e. g. ऋतपथिकः,
शतपथिको ! cf. शतषष्टेः षिकन् पथ: Ks.
on P. [I. 2.60.
षित् an affix or sometimes a word
marked by the mute letter , The
mute letter धु attached to roots
signifies the addition of the krt
affix अङ्क ( अ ) in the sense of the
verbal activity: e. g. क्षमा from the
root क्षमूष् ( क्षम् ), जरा from पृष्ठ ( दृ );
cf. बिद्धिदादिभ्भीSङ्क P. III. 3.104:
attached to affixes, ष् signifies the
addition of the fern. affix ई ( ड्य् ),
e. g. वराक्री, इातपथिकी etc. cf. द्विौरा-
दिभ्यश्च P. IV. 1.41. A few roots
headed by घट् (roots from घट् to
स्वर्) are to be looked upon as त्रित्
for the purpose of the addition
of the krt. affix अ: e. g. घटा, व्यथा
etc. cf. घटादयः षितः ' Gaza sutra in
Dhatupatha-
षीध्वम् combination of the verbal
ending ध्वम् with the augment
सीयुट् prefixed to it, which is
changed into षङ्म् after a root-
base ending in a vowel excepting
अ: cf. इणः षीध्वं बुङ्कलटां धेीङ्गात् P.VIII.
3.78, 79.
षुक् augment ' added to () मनु be-
fore the tad. affixes अञ्ज् and य e.8.
मानुषः मनुष्यः; cf. P, IV. 1.16l; (2)

षण्यए
-&
त्रपु and जतु before the tad. afix
अण् e.g, त्रापुषम्, जातुषम् cf P. IV.
3.138: (3) धनु before the tad.
affix य्, e.g. धनुष्या cf P. IV.4.89:
(4) the root भी before the afix.
of the causal, e. g. भषयत cf P.VII
3.40: (5) the root नी before the
affixतृन् ( तृ ) e. g. नष्टा; cf नुयेत: बुऋ
च P. III. 2.135 Vart 2 and Wart 4.
षण्यप् tad. affix एन्य added to the
word सामघ, e. g. समीधेन्ये मेन्त्रः
साधनीं ऋक्: cf. समिधमाधान षण्यण्, P.
IV. 3.120 Wart. 10.
षोडइाकारिका an anonymous work
consisting of only 16 stan2as dis-
cussing the denotation of words
and that of the case-relations with
a commentary by the author
himself.
स्कन् tad. affix क added to the word
पाथन् in the sense of * one who
goes ', e. g. पथिकः पथिकी: cf. पथ:
ष्कन् P. V. 1.75.
ष्टरच् tad. affix तर added to the words
क्रांसू and गीणी in the sense of small-
ness; cf हृस्वा कासू: कासूतरी, गोणीतरी
Kas. on P. V, 3.90.
धुत्व cerebralization of the dental
consonants as prescribed by the
rule ष्टुना ष्टु: P. VIII. 4. 41; e. g.
कोयष्टिकंटीक्रतं, पटा, उङ्कीन: etc; cf Kas.
on P. VIII. 4.41.
धून (U) krt.affix त्र, signifying the acute
accent of the initial vowel and the
addition of ई to the base in the
feminine,added to the root धा in the
sense ofobject (कर्मन) and to the roots !
दाप्, नी, शास् and others in the sense
of instrument (करण); e.g. धात्री, दात्रम्,
नत्रम्, स्तोत्रम्, पोत्रम् etc; cf. P. III. 2.
18l-183; (2) Unadi affix त्र as seen
in the word गात्र from the root इ:
cf अन्नवधकगात्रविचक्षणाञ्जराद्यर्थम् P. II.
4.54 Vart 12.
धूल tad, affix ल, causing Vrddhi to
the initial vowel and the addition
372
षपत
of the fem. affix ई, applied to the
word ढामी in the sense of product
or portion; दामलिं भस्म; cf. P. IV.
3.142.
ष्ठच्( tad. affix इक added to the word
देनैकाद् in the sense of censurable
giving gf interest or profit; दशेक्राद्-
इिाक्र:,दशैकादशिकी; cf. Kas. on P. IV.
4.31.
ष्ठन् tad, affix इक (I) added to the
word कुसीद in the sense of giving a
sum or something on an obje-
ctionable rate of interest or profit;
cf. कुसीदं प्रयच्छति कुसीदिक:, कुसीदिकी: cf.
P. IV. 4.31 ; (2) added to the
words पैरीडाॅ am पुरडाइ in the sense
of texplanatory book thereon' ; e.g.
पुरोडाशिक्रः पौरोडाशिक:, पुरोडाशिकी, पौरो-
डाइक्री: cf. P. IV. 3.70; (3) added
to the words पर्प and others as also
to श्वगण, भस्त्रा and others, विवध, वीवध
क्रिदार and others, the words झालालु
पात्र and the words आढक, अाचित and
पात्र at the end of Dvigu compounds
in the specific senses mentioned;
e. g. पर्षिक:, श्वगाणेक:, भार्त्रक:, दालाठकः
ब्याढाकेको etc.; cf. P. IV. 4.10, ll,
16, 17, 53, 54, W. 1.46, 54, 55.
' ष्ठळ tad. affix इक added (1) to the
word आकर्षे ( touchstone ) in the
sense of ' living thereby ?: e. g. '
अाकर्षक:, अाकर्षिकी: cf. P. IV. 4.9;
(2) to the word अावसथ in the sense
of * dwelling in ', e. g. अाचसथ वसति
अावसाथकः, आवसथिक्री: cf. P.IV. 4.74.
षफ feminine affix अायनी, termed also
तद्वित (l) added, according to the
Eastern school of grammarians, to
words ending with the tad. affix
यञ् ( prescribed by rules like
गर्गादिभ्ये यञ् IV.1.105) e. g. गाग्र्यायणी,
वात्स्यायनी as contrasted with गांगf or
वात्सी according to the Western
school of Paini; (2) added to
form feminine bases of the
words from लीइित to कत to which

फक्र
-
यञ् has already been added as also
to the words कौरव्य् and माण्डुक्र. e. g.
लौहित्यायनी, बाभ्रव्यायणी, कात्यायनीं, कोरब्या-
यणी, माण्ड्क्रायनी cf. P. IV. 1.17-19.
एफक् tad. affix अयन, added to the
words कापिशी and रङ्कु as also to the
words बार्ही, उर्दि in the residual or
miscellaneous tad. senses; e. g.
कापिशायनं मधु, कापिञ्जायनी द्राक्षा, राङ्कवायणी
गौ:, बाहृायनी, औदर्शयनी, पादयनी, cf. M.
Bh. on P. IV. 2.99 and 100.
ष्यङ्ग tad. affix य (taking Samprasarana
change i e. ई before the words
पुत्र and पति and बन्धु in the Bahu-
vrihi compound) added, instead of
the affix अण् or इञ्ज, in the sense of
offspring, (l) to words having a
long ( गुरु ) vowel for their penul-
timate , only in the formation of
feminine bases, e.g. कारीषगन्ध्या कौमुद्-
गन्ध्या, बाराह्या; कारीषगन्धीपुत्रः, कारीब-
गन्धीपति:, कारीषगन्धबिन्धुः ( Bah.
comp.): cfP.IV.}.78; (2) to words
expressive of family names like
पुणक, मुखर etc. as also to the words
क्रौड, लाडि, व्याडि आपिशाल etc. and
optionally to the words देवयाज्ञि and
others in the formation offeminine
bases; e. g. पौणिक्या, मौखर्या, क्रौड्या,
ब्याडया, अापिळाल्या etc.: cf. P. IV.1.79,
80, 81.
ष्यञ्न् tad. affix () in the sense of
* nature ' applied optionally with
the affix इमानेच् to words showing
colour as also to words headed by
दृढ: e. g. ढौक्ल्यम् , शुक्लिमा, काष्ण्येम्
कृष्णमा, दाढर्यम्, द्रढिमा etc.: cf. P. V.
1.123: (2) in the sense of nature
as also in the sense of professional
work to words of quality and
words headed by नाइण्: e. g. जाडयम्,
ब्राह्मण्यम् cf P.V. 1.124; (8) to the
words चतुर्वर्ण, त्रिलेाकी and others in
thesamesenseas that of those wery
words; e.g.चातुर्वण्र्यम् त्रैलेक्यम् षाड्गुण्यम्
सन्यम् etc, cf. P. V. 6.124 Vart, 1.
373
संक्रम
घबुन् krt. affix अक्र added to a root in
the sense of a skilled artisan नर्तक्र:,
नर्तक्री; खननक्र: खनक्री; रजकः, रजनी; cf.P.
III. 1.145.
स
स् (l) a sibilant letter of the dental
class of consonants possessed of
the properties श्वास, अचेष, कण्ठविवार
and महृाप्राण ; ( 2 ) substitute for
visarjaniya if followed by a hard
consonant excepting a sibilant
cf. P. VIII. 3. 34, 36, 38, 40, 42,
46, 47, 48-54,
स ( 1 ) short term for समास used
by ancient grammarians ; the
term is found used in the.jainen-
dra Vyakaratha also ; cf. ति्रवाक्रा-
रक्राणां प्राक् सुबुत्पतैः काद्भ: सविधि: Jain..
Pari. 100; cf. also राजाsसे ; ( 2 )
Unadi affix स placed after the roots
वृ, तृ, वद् , इन and others; cf.Unadi-
Sutras 342-349; (3) tad. affix स
in the quadruple senses (चातुरर्थिक)
applied to the words तृण and
others. e.g. तृणस:; cf. P. IV.2.80;
(4) tad. affix स applied to the
word मृद् when praise is , in-
tended e. g. मृत्सा, मृत्रनI:; also cf.
P. W. 4.41; (5) substitute for the
preposition सम् before the words
इित and तत: cf. समो हितततयोर्वा लेपः
M. Bh. on P. VI.1.144 Varr. I.
सेकर्षे non-resolution of the conso-
nants य् and व् into इय् and उव्
e.g. त्र्यम्बकम् as contrasted with
त्रियम्बक्रम् which is called विकर्षे.
सेक्रम ( 1 ) joining with a subse-
duent word after omitting a word
or two occurring between; cf,
गलत्पदमतिक्रम्य अगलता सहृ संधानं संक्रम:;
e. g. शूद्र अर्य for ् यदयं where यत्
is passed over in the krama and
other recitals; cf W. Pr. IV. 77,
165, 194; (2) a term used in

संक्षेप्तसार
ancient grammars for such affixes
and others which do not allow
the substitution of guna or v!ddhi
for the preceding vowel; the
term is also used for the letters
कू, ग् and ङ्क when they are mute,
serving only the purpose of pre-
venting gua or vrddhi; cf. मृजर-
जादौ सेक्रमे विभाषा वृद्धिमारभन्ते M. Bh. on
P. I.1.3. Vart. 10.
सेक्षिप्तसार name of a complete gra-
mmar-work written by क्रमदीश्वर for
facility of study. This grammar
appears to have been written
before the time ofकैयटे or हेमचन्द्र,
as can be seen from the popular
stan2a परेत्र पाणिनयिज्ञा: केचित् कालापकंी-
विदा: | एके विश्रान्तावेद्याः स्युरन्ये संक्षिप्तसा-
रक; ll
सेख्या (1)a numeral such as एक,द्वि etc.
In Panini Astadhyayi, although
the term is defined as applicable
to the word बहु, गण and words
ending with the tad. affixes वतु and
डत, such as तावत् , क्रति and the like,
still the term is applied to all
numerals to which it is seen appli-
ed by the people: cf M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.23 also Pari. Sek. Pari. 9:
(2) numerical order; cf. स्पोष्वेव
संख्या V. Pr. I. 49.
सेख्यातानुदेशा application respective-
ly of terms stated in the उद्धेद्य and
विधेय portions in their numerical
order when the stated terms are
equal in number: cf यथासंख्यम-
नुदेशा: समानाम् P. 1.3.10: cf. also
पञ्चागमाख्त्रय अागमिन: वैषम्यात् संख्यातानुदेशे
न प्राणेनेति M. Bh. Ahnika 2.
सेख्यान enumeration; statement: cf.
एकाजनेकाज्ग्रहणेषु चचातसेख्यानादनेकाच्त्वं
भविष्यति, M.Bh. on Sivasitra l Vairt.
10.
संख्यापूर्वे with a numeral word placed
first or at the beginning; a term
used for defining the Dvigu com-
_
374 - संघात
pound cf सेख्यापूर्वीं द्विगु: P. II. 1.52.
सेख्येय lit, those that are to be count-
ed; objects of enumeration; cf.
बहुव्रीहौ संख्येय डजबहुगणात् P. V. 4.78:
cf also अथवा संख्या नाम इयं परप्रधाना |
संख्ययमनया विर्दाप्यम, M. Bh. on P. II.
2.24 Vart. 9.
सेगताथै a word unit where the senses
of two words are mixed together
completely as in a compound word
such as राजपुरुषः etc.; cf संगतार्थ समर्थम्
M. Bh. on P. II. 1.1. Vart. 4.
सेगम combination of things coming
one after another; cf. उदात्तपूर्वेप्य-
नुदात्तसेगमः where the term is used
with respect to a combination of
grave syllables; cf. also ब्यञ्जनसंगमं
सेयेोगे विद्यात्, R. Pr. XVIII. 19.
सेयूर्होत included; the word is often
used in the Mahabhasya in conne-
ction with instances which are
covered by a rule, if interpreted
in a specific way: cf. अथ निमित्तs-
भिसेवध्यमाने यत्तदस्य योगस्य मूर्धाभिषिक्तमु-
दाहृरणं तदपि संगृहीतं भवति M. Bh. on P.
I. ]. 57; cf. also एकाथींभांव सामथ्र्य
समास एक्रः सेग्रहृतो भवति, M. Bh. on P.
II. 1.1.
सेग्रहृ name of a very vast work on
grammar attributed to an ancient
grammarian Vyadi who is sup-
posed to have been a relative of
Prini; cf. सेग्रहंस्तमुपागते Bhartp-
hari's Vikyapadya cf. also संग्रहृ-
प्रतिकञ्चुके: cfः संग्रहं नाम लक्षश्लोकात्मको
त्याधिकृतो ग्रन्थ: | Some quotations
only are found from the Sarh-
graha in grammar works, but the
work is lost long ago.
सेघत (1) aggregatc, collection , the
word is often used in grammar in
connection with letters ( वर्ण ); cf.
वर्णसंघातः पदम् cf. also संघातस्यैकाथ्र्यात्
सुबभाबी वर्णात् M. Bh. on Siva sutra 5
Vart. 13; the word is also used
in connection with a collection of

संघातार्थं
375
संदष्ट
words cf सेघातस्य समाससंज्ञा प्राप्नोति !
ऋद्धस्य राज्ञ पुरुष: M. Bh. on P. I.4.13
Vart. 8; (2) effort made in the
utterance of a word; cf संघाते नाम
प्रयत्नः स बाह्याभ्यन्तरत्वेन द्विधा | अनन्त-
भद्वभाप्य on W. Pr. I. 9. cf. also स
संघातादीन् वाक् V. Pr. I.9.
संघाताथै collective sense givcn by a
combination of letters called पदार्थ.
When the collective sense is given
by a combination of words it is
called पदार्थ, and when the idea is
complete it is called वाक्यार्थ. Some-
times the meaning of a com-
pound word is taken individu-
ally and not. collectively: such a
meaning is called संधातावग्रहीतार्थ cf.
नामाख्यातप्रहृणं संघातावग्रहृतार्थं द्रष्टव्यम् M.
Bh. on IV. 3.72 Vart. 1.
संचय a collection or a group: cf.
वर्णसंचय which means अक्षरसमाम्नाय or
alphabet.
सेज्ञा a technical term a short word-
ing to convey ample sense: a term
to know the general nature cf
things; convention; cf. वृद्धदाब्दः
संज्ञा; अादेव: संज्ञिनः M.Bh. on P.1-1.1.
There are two main divisions of
संज्ञा-कृत्रिमसंज्ञा or an artificial term
such as टि, बु, or भ which is merely
conventional, and अकृत्रिमसंज्ञ| which
refers to the literal sense conveyed
by the word such as अव्यय, सर्वनाम
and the like. Some grammar works
such as the Candra avoid purely
conventional terms, These sam-
jhas are necessary for every scien-
tific treatise. In Panini's grammar,
there are the first two chapters
giving and explaining the techni-
cal terms whose number exceeds
well-nigh a hundred.
सेज्ञाधिकार a topic or a chapter or a
portion of a treatise in which
technical terms are given and ex-
plained; cf, संज्ञाधिकारोयम्; M. Bh. !
} on P. I. 1.46, I. 1.56, I. 4.1, I.
_ 4.23; see the word संज्ञा.
an operation with respect
to which a technical term has been
9xpressly mentioned: cf. संज्ञापूर्वक्री
विधिरनित्यः, Par. Sek. Pari. 93.1:
Y5Vyadj Pari. 53.
स्रज्ञाभ्|्त (1) that, which by usage has
become a technical word possessed
of a conventional sense: cf. किं
पुनयiने एतानि संज्ञाभूतानि अाख्यंनिान तत्र
उत्पत्त्या भवितव्यम् , M. Bh. on III. 1.
26 Vart. 7; (2) which stands as a
proper noun or the name of a
person; cf. संज्ञाभूतास्तु न सर्वादयः S. K.
on P. I. !.27.
सेज्ञाविघि a rule laying down the defi-
, .nition of a संज्ञा or a technical term
? as contrasted with कार्यविधि or a rule
laying down a grammatical opera-
tion: cf. संज्ञाविंधौ वृद्धिरादैच् अदेङ्कणः
इति M.Bh. on Siva Stºtra 3, 4. '
सेज्ञाशब्द् one of the four divisions of
words- जातिद्राव्द, गुण्ाब्दं, क्रियाज्ञाबद् and
संज्ञाशब्द; the संज्ञाशब्द is called also
यदृच्छाशब्द a word forming the name
of a thing by virtue of a conven-
tion; See यदृच्छाशब्द.
सेाइन् the recipient or the bearer or
possessor of a technical term; cf. .
संज्ञासंज्ञयसंदेह्यश्च ' कुतो ह्यतद् वृद्धशब्दः संज्ञा,
अदिच: संज्ञिन इति M. Bh. on P. I.
1.l Vart. 3; cf.also ख्वभावात् संज्ञ:
संाञ्जनः प्रत्याय्य निवर्तनेत M. Bh. on P.
I, 1.1. Wart. 7.
संतान continuity; line; continuous
recital.
सद्भीमृत name of a commentary on
the Mugdhabodha Vyakarana of
Bopadeva, written by a gramma-
rian, named Bholanatha.
सेदष्ट a fault of pronunciation when
the constituent letters of a word
are uttered with the teeth kept
close together. Kaiyata has ex-

**x
सद्हृ
376
संनिपातपरिभाषा
plained the word as वर्धित.
सेर्दह ambiguity; doubt regarding the
wording of a rule or its interpre-
tation or regarding the correct-
ness of a word. It is looked upon
as the main purpose ofgrammar to
solve doubts regarding the correct-
ness of words cf. व्याख्यानते विशेषप्रति-
प्रातर्नहिं संदेहादलक्षणम् Pari. Sekh.Pari.1.
संदइनवृत्त्यर्थ lit, meant for the remo-
val of doubt; the word is used in
connection with a word or an ex-
pression or an addition of a mute
letter, as seen in the expression of
the sutrakra for the purpose of
leaving no kind of doubt regarding
the wording or its meaning cf. तंत्र
अवद्यं संदेहनिवृत्त्यर्थं विशेषार्थिना विशेषोनुप्रयो-
क्तव्यः M.Bh. on P.II. 2.24 Vart. 6.
संधारण putting very close in utter-
' ance; slurring of a phonetic ele-
ment when it appears as almost
suppressed; cf. सेधारणं वर्णश्रुतेः संवरणम्
Uvvata on R. Pr. VI. 5.
संधि euphonic combination; phone-
tic combination of two vowels or
two consonants or one vowel and
one consonant resulting from their
close utterance ;many kinds ofsuch
combinations and varieties are giv-
en in the Pratisakhya works. Inthe
Siddhantakaumudi, Bhattoj Dksi-
ta hasgiven five kinds of such San-
dhis at the beginning of his work;
cf. पदान्तपदाद्योः संधिः | यः कश्चिद्वदिक्रद्भाञ्जसे-
धिरुच्यत स पदान्तपदाद्योचेदेतव्य:ते संधयश्चत्वार
भवन्ति | स्वरयेो: ब्यञ्जनयो: स्वरव्यञ्जनयेीश्र V.
Pr. III. 3.
सेध्य a diphthong: see below the
word संधिः cf अर्थनामनी संध्यम् .
संध्यक्षर diphthong, a vowel result-
ing from a combination of two
vowels, but which is to be looked
upon as one single vowel by
reason ofonly a single effort being
required for its pronunciation: the
letters ए, पे, ओ and औौ are termed
as संध्यक्षर as contrasted with समानाक्षर,
cf. अष्टौ समानाक्षराण्यादितस्ततश्चत्वारि संध्यक्षर्-
ण्युत्तराणि R. Pr. I. 10; cf. also T. Pp.
II. 3, R. T. l l l ; cf. also संध्यक्षराणा-
मिदुतौ हृस्वादेशे Kat. Pari. 43
संनमन interpretation, explanation:
cf यथायथं विभक्ती: सेनमयत् Nir. 1.
सेनिकर्ष contact, juxtaposition; this
contact between two letters is
called संत when it is very close:
cf. परः संनिकर्षः संहिता P. I. 4,109.
स्मंनिध्यापन putting together too close,
so that the two phonetic elements
which are so placed, coalesce
together and result into a third,
or one of the two merges into
another.
संनिाधलः juxtaposition; coming toge-
ther phonetically very close: 3f.
पदानामावलम्बतेनोच्चारणम् Tarka Sarh-
graha; अव्यवधानेन अन्वयप्रातयेग्युपास्थतिः
Tattvacintamani 4; the same as
संनिकर्षे which see above.
संनिपात (1) a contact or relation of
two things. cf संनिपातो द्वयोः संबन्धः |
Pari. Sck. Pari. 85; (2) coming
together; cf न लक्ष्यत विकृति: संनिपातं
M. Bh. on P. III. 2.123 Vव्रnt 5.
संनिपातपरिभाषा the maxim or can.
vention that an operation which
is based upon, or is caused or
occasioned by, a relationship bet-
ween two things cannot break
their relation : in short, such an
9peration as results in breaking
the relationship between tw6
things on which it is based, can-
not take place. This dictum is
many times followed in grammar
in Preventing the application of
Such rules as are likely to spoil
the formation of the correct word;
many times, however, this dictum
has to be ignored; For details

संनिपातलक्षण
877 *
संप्रसारणे
see Pari. Sek. Pari. 86; also| कियदनुदात्तम् l M.Bh. om P. [. 2.32.
Mahabhasya on P. I. 1.39.
संनिपातलक्षण an operation which is
characterized by the relationship
between two words or two pho-
netic elements. See संनिपातपरिभाषा
above.
संनेियेोग occurrence together of two
or more words in orie sentence
or in one grammatical rule: cf.
संनियेागशिष्टानामन्यतरापाये उभयोरप्यपाय: M.
Bh. on IV 1.36 Vart. 4; cf. also
एष एव न्यायो यदुत संनियोगशिष्टानामन्यतरापाये
उभयोरप्यभावः तद्यथा देवदत्तयज्ञदत्ताभ्याामदं !
कर्तव्यमिति देवदत्तापाये यज्ञदत्तेपि न करोति,
M. Bh. on V. 1.64 and 76.
संनिावष्ट placed together in a parti-
cular order at a particular place;
cf. क्र सेनिावष्टानां प्रत्याहृार: M. Bh. on
P. III. 1.40 Vart. 3; III. 2.127
Vart, 6.
संनिवेश्ा order or arrangement of
letters: cf. वर्णानामानुपूर्वेण संावेदा:
समवाय: M. Bh. Ahnika I. Wart.
15; cf. also संनिवशेान्यः प्रत्याहृारार्थ: R.
T. I. 3.
संनिहित (1) present by implication;
taken as granted; cf. अपि च ऋकारग्रहृणे
लकारग्रहृणं सेनिाहृतं भवति M. Bh. on P.
I. 1.9. Vart. 5; (2) nearby, at
hand; cf. इहृ सर्वेषु साधनषु सांनिहितेषु
कदाचित् पचतीत्येतद् भवति, कदावेन भवति !
M. Bh. on I. 3.1. Vart. 2; I. 4.23
Vart. 15.
सेपद्यक the agent of the activity
or of the event which is to take
place: cf अभूततद्भावे संपद्यकर्तरि च्विः |
संपद्यते: क्रतां संपद्यकर्तीं HKs. on P. V.
4.50. _
सेपृक्त completely mixed in such a
way that one of the two or more
letters mixed together can neither
be distinguished as different, nor
can be separated; cf. तद्यथा ] क्षारोदके
संपृक्त आमिश्रीभूतत्वान्न ज्ञायते कियत् क्षीरं
क्रियदुदकम् | एवमिहृापि न ज्ञायत क्रियदुदात्तं
48
सेप्रातपात understanding, compre-
hension of the sense; cf. गौणमुख्यये-
मुख्य संप्रतिपातः, M. Bh. on P. VIII.
3.82 Wart, 2.
संप्रत्यय the same as संप्रतिपात which
see above: cf. ईतेरेथा ह्यसंप्रत्यये यथI
लोकं M. Bh. on P. I. 1.1 Wrt.
2: cf.also येनोन्वारितेन सास्नालाङ्गूलककुद-
बुरावषाणिनां संप्रत्ययो भवति स शब्दः M.
Bh. on Ahnika 1.
सेप्रदान a karaka relation or a rela-
tion between a noun and the
verbal activity with which it is con-
nected, of the type of the donation
and the donee; the word is tech-
nically used in connection with *
the bearer of such a relation cf.
कर्मणा यमाभप्रेति स संप्रदानम् P. I.4.32.
संप्रधारणा simultaneous occurrence.
अछापस्य च यणादेशस्य नास्ति संप्रघारणा,
' M. Bh. on I. 4.2 Wart. 9; cf also
सद्वासद्वयीश्च नास्त संप्रधारणा M. Bh.
on P. WI, 1.9. Wart. 7.
सेप्रयुक्त used together with; cf इकार*
मति स एव वास्य ढकारः सकूष्मणा संप्रयुक्तः
R.. Pr. I. 22.
सेप्रसारण lit. extension; the process
of changing a semi-vowel into a
simple vowel of the same sthana
or place of utterance; the substi-
tution of the vowels इ, उ, ऋ and ल
for the semi-vowels य्, व् , र्and ?
respectively; cf इग्यणः संप्रसृारणम् P.
1.1.45. The term संप्रसारण is ren>
dered as a *resultant vowel or as
tan emergent vowel'. The ancient
term wasप्रसारण and possibly it re-
ferred to the extension of य् and ，
into their constituent parts इ +अ,
उ-+अ etc. the vowel अ being of a
weak grade but becoming strong
afer the merging of the subsc-
guent vowel into it 9:8 cf. सर्वत्र
्ार्ये ड: P. III. 2.8 Vart.1- For
the words taking this sarhprasraha

संप्रसारणवलयस्त्व
378 सलभव
< ?
o
' change, see P. VI. ] .13 to .9.
According to some grammarians
, the term संप्रसारण is applied to the
substituted vowels while according
to others the term refers to the
operation of the substitution: cf.
, M. Bh. on P. I. 1.16. The sub-
stitution of the sarhprasiraha
vowel is to be given preference in
the formation of a word; , cf.
संप्रसारणं तदाश्रयं च कार्यं बलवत् Pari. Sek.
Pari. 1 19.
सेप्रसारणबळiयस्त्घ the relative supe*
rior strength of the sarhprasaratha
Change in comparison with other
* operations occurring simultane-
otisly. The phrase न वा संप्रसारणबली-
यस्त्वात् is often used in the Mah-
bhasya which is based upon the
dictum of the superior strength of
the sarhprasarana substitution,
" which is announced by the writer
of the Warttikas; P. VI. 1.17
Vart, 2. , See संप्रसारण.
संबद्धार्थे with senses ( of the two
words ) merely connected with
each other and not complctely
mixed into ,cach other; cf. संगतार्थ
. समर्थ संसृष्टार्थे समर्थं संश्रक्षितार्थ समर्थ संबद्धार्थ
समर्थमिति ... क्र: पुनरिहृ वश्नात्यर्थः ) संबद्ध
इत्युच्यते यो रज्ज्वा अयसा वा क्रीले व्यतिषक्त
भवति, M. Bh. on P. II. 1,1. Vart,4,
This संबद्धार्थत्व s connectcd with the
: definition व्यपेक्षा out of the two de-
finitions एकांथींभाव and ब्यपेक्षा cited
with respect to the word सामथ्र्थ.
सेबन्ध (1) lit.connection in general:cf.
धातुसंबन्धे प्रत्ययाः P.III. 4.I. The word
is explained by the general term
विशेषणविशेष्यभाव: cf. संबन्धो विशेषणविशेध्ध-
' भाव: Kas. on P.III.4.1 ; (2) context,
cf. संबन्धादतुद् गन्तव्यं यं प्रात यदप्रधाने तं
पति तदुपसर्जनं भवति M. Bh. on P. I.
2.43. Vart. 5.
* _ -
रलेबन्ध्यपाद् name given by convention
' by grammarians to the fourth
pada of the third adhyaya of
Pinis Asdhyay ， which begins
with the stra धातुसंवन्ध प्रत्ययाः P.
III. 4.1.
सेवन्ध्शिब्द् relative term; the term
refers to words connected in such
a way by their meaning that if
one of thern is uttered, the other
has to be anticipated and under-
stood; e. g. पितृ, भ्रातृ, मातृ, भार्या etc.
cf. तद्यथा ， संबन्धिशब्दाः ， मातरि वर्तितव्यम् !
पितरि दूथ्षतव्यम् | न चेर्ष्योच्यते स्वस्यां मातरि
स्वस्मिन्वा पितरि इति	cf. also M.Bh. on
I 1.71 ; cf. also प्रधानमुपसर्जनं च संबन्धि-
इाब्दावेत M. Bh. on P. I. 2.43 Vart.
5; I. 2.48 Vart, 4,
संबुद्धं (1) a 1erm used in Pinini's
grammar for the case-affix of the
vocative singular; cf. एकवचनं संबुद्धः
P. II. 3, 49; the vocative is,
however, not looked upon as a
separate case, but the designation
संबोधन is given to the nominative
case, having the sense of संबोधनः
(2) the word is also used in the
general sense of सैर्वेधिन् i. e. addre-
ssing or calling: cf. एकश्रुति दूरात्संबुद्धः
क्रिामेदं पारिभाषिक्याः संबुद्धेग्रदृणमेकवचेनं संबुद्वि:
(II. 3.49) आईस्विदन्र्थग्रहृणं संवोधनं सेबुद्वि:
M. Bh. on P. I. 2.33.
सेबोधन calling or address which is
given as ome of the additional
senses of the nominative case
affixes ( cf. संवैधने च P. II. 3, 47 )
in addition to those given in
thc rule प्रतिपादिकार्थलिङ्गपरिमाणवन्वन-
भात्रे प्रथमा P. II. 3.46: cf. आभिमुख्य-
करणं संबोधनम् K. on P. II. 3.47.
सेभव iit. possibility. The word is
used in the general sense of the
possibility of the application of a
rule or of the occurrence ofa rule;
cf. थिाधानयमसंभधे विधिरत्र ज्यायान् .M.
Bh. on VI, 4.49 Vrt.: Pari. Sek.
Pari. 100; cf. also असति संभवे बाधनं
भवति | अार्इत च संभवे यदुभयं स्यात् | Sira-

संसर्ग
संयुक्त 379 -
deva Pari. 35.
सेयुक्त (!) closcly connected;
एहृपतिना संयुक्ते घ्थ: P. IV. 4.90; (2)
joint, conjoint; the term is used
frequently in connection with
two or more consonants in juxta-
position; cf. अननुस्वारसंयुक्तम् T. Pr.
XXII. 15. _
सेयोगा connection in general; the
word is used as a technical term
in the grammar of Panini, in the
sense of two or more consonants
coming closely together unsepara-
ted by any vowcl: cf.हृलेनन्तराः संयोगः
cf P. I. 1.7; cf also अनन्तरं संयोगः
V. Pr. I. 48.
सेयोगादिलेप the elision of the first of
the conjunct consonants if it is स्
or क्, provided the conjunct con-
sonants are at the end of a word
or followed by a consonant which
is not a semi-vowel nor a nasal;
c. g. तक्र, तटवान् from the root त;
cf. स्कं|ेः सेयोगाद्योरन्ते च P. VIII. 2.99.
सेयोगान्तलोप the clision of the final
of thc conjunct consonants when
they are at the end of a word
provided they are not formed of
र् as the first member and any
consonant except स् as the second
member: e.g- गोमान्, ऊ etc.: cf. |
संयोगान्तस्य लोपः,रात्सस्य P.VIII.2.23,24.
सेवरण lit. concealment; slurring over
a consonant by practically merging
its sound into that of the follow-
ing one; the technical term अभि-
fधान is also used in the same
. sense; e. g. षट् द्वा द्व; cf. संघारणे
. सेबरणं धुतश्र R. Pr. VI. 5. -
सैवादचन्तामणि name of a small
: , treatise on roots and their mean-
. ings written by : a grammarian
, mamed इन्द्रदतेीप|ध्याय who has also
-: writtef a commentary on the
.. Sabdakaustubha called कौस्तुभगुण
and सिद्धान्तकौमुदींमूढाकेकाप्रका,
ct.
H
सेवार one of the external efforts in
thc production of a sound when
the gullet is a little bit contracted
as at the time of the utterance of
the third, fourth and the fifth of
the class-consonants; cf. कण्ठबिलस्य
संक्रीन्वः संबार: Uddyota on P. I. 1.9.
सेविज्ञात conventional: lit. known
widely among the people, as a
result, of course, of convention; cf.
सेविज्ञातानि तानि यथा गौरश्वः पुरुषो ह्यस्तीति
Nir. I. 12. _
संविज्ञान apprehension: cf. बहुव्रीहौ तद्गु-
णसंविज्ञानमपि.
सेवृत lit. covered or concealed;name
of an internal effort in the produc-
tion ofsound which is accompani-
ed with a laryngeal hum; cf. संवृर्तः
घ्षत्रान्: cf also हृस्वस्यावर्णस्य प्रये
संवृतम् | प्राक्रयादशायां तु विवृतभव S.K.on
P.I.1.9;cf. also तत्रेात्पतैः प्राभ्यदा जिह्वाग्रो-
पाग्रमध्यमूछनि तत्तद्वर्णोत्पत्तिस्थानानां त|ल्वादीनां
समीपमेव केवलं अवतिष्ठन्त तदा संवृतता
Sabdakaus on F. I. 1.9. _
सेश्लिष्ट very closely held together
just as the sound of the consonant
र्in the vowel क्र, cf. ऋलवणं रेफलकारौ
सेश्ल् अश्रुतिधरौ एकवर्णौ where Uvvata
has explained the word सेाश्लश्ट as
एकीभूत; cf Uvvata on V. Pr. IV.
148. _
सेसगे lit. contact, connection; (1)
contact of the air passing up
through the gullet and striking
the several places which produce
the sound, which is ofthree kinds,
hard, middling and soft: cf. संसर्ग
, वायुस्थानसंसर्गः अभित्रातात्मक:	स त्रिविधः |
अयःपिण्डवद्दारुपिण्डवदूर्णपिण्डवृाद्ते ， तदुक्त-
मापिद्दालशिक्षायाम् ] रोपेर्जयमवर्णकरं वायुः अय:-
पिण्डवत्स्थानमापेाडयति | अन्तस्थात्रर्णकरी दारु-
पिण्डवत् | ऊष्मस्थस्वरवर्णकर ऊर्णौपिण्डवत् }
com. on. 'T, Pr. XXIII. 1 ; .(2)
syntactical connection between
, words themselves which exists'be-
, tween pairs of words as between

संस्पृष्ट
380
सैंहिता
nouns and adjectives as also be-
tween .verbs and the karakas,
which is necessary for understand-
ing the meaning of a sentence
Some Mimamsakas and Logicians
hold that sarhsarga itselfis the me-
aning of a sentence. The syntacti-
cal relation between two words is
described to be of two kinds अमद-
संसर्ग of the type of आधाराधेयभाव and
भदसेसगे of the type of विषयावषायभाव,
समवाय, जन्यजनकभाव and the like.
सेस्छष्ट words syntactically connected
with each other, and hence, cap-
able of expressing the sense of a
sentence;cf. संस्पृष्टो वाक्यार्थे: Vakya-
padya II. 2.
सेस्|ृष्टवादिपक्ष the theory, that the
meaning of a sentence is a novel
thing ( अपूर्व ), held bysome Mimर्त-
rhsakas who believe that words
connected with activity display
their phenomenal capacity ( अनुभा-
विकाशाक्ति ) after the recalling of the
senses of words by the recalling
capacity (रुमारिकाशात ).
सेस्कार (1)preparation such as (a)that
of a word by placing the affix
after the base and accomplishing
all the necessary changes, or (b)
that of a sentence by placing all
words connected mutually by
syntax and then explaining their
formation; these two views are
respectively called the पदसंस्कारपक्ष
and the वाक्यसेरुकारपक्ष; (2) gramma-
tical formation; cf. स्वरसंस्कारयोश्छन्दसि
नियम: । सेस्कारो लोपागमवर्णावकारप्रकृतिभाव-
लक्षण: Uvvata on V.Pr. I.1; cf. also
तद्यत्र स्वरसेस्कोरौ श्रादशिकेन गुणनं अन्वितौ
स्याताम् etc. Nir.I.
सैस्छतमञ्जरी a short handbook on
declension and case-relations
written by a grammarian named
Sadhusundara, who lived in the
century.
सेस्पृष्ट lit. formed by combination or
compact the term is used in the
PrtiSikhyas for diphthongs which
are combinations, in fact, of two
vowels which are completely
mixed being produced with a
single effort. The diphthongs
and ऋ also, are called सेस्पृष्टवर्ण.
सैस्वाद् a peculiar phonetic element
described along with another one
namcd निगार both ofwhich have got
nodefinite place of utterance in the
mouth; cf. अविशेषस्थानौ संस्वादानगारौ !
पकारनकारयकारा: वा संस्वादे | हृकारमकारना.
सिक्या वा निगारे I com. on R.T.11.
संस्वार a combination or collection of
the Swaras or musical notes for
purposes of singing the Sama
hymns.
सेहृत a tone in which two or more
accents or tones are mixed up
with one another, cf Bharadwaja
Sik.
संहार unnecessary contraction of the
place (स्थान)asalsooftheinstrument
( करण ), which results into a fault
of utterance called पांडन; cf. विद्यार-
संहृारयेद्वयीसपींडन R. Pr.XIV.2.
संहिता position of words or parts of
words in the formation ofa word
duite near each other which results
into the natural phonetic coale-
scence of the preceding and the
following letters. Originally when
the Vedic hymns or the running
prose passages of the Yajur-
veda were split up into their
different constituent parts name-
ly the words or padas by the
Padakaras, the word संहिता or
संहितापाठ came into use as contrast-
cd with the पदपाठ. The writers of
of the Pratisakhyas have consegu-
ently defined संइिता as पदप्रकृतिः संहृिता,
beginning º of the eighteenth
while Panini who further split up

संहितापाठ
381
सए
-x
the padas into bases ( प्रकृति ) and
affixes ( प्रत्यय ) and mentioned
several augments and substitutes,
the phonetic combinations, which
resulted inside the word or pada,
had to be explained by reason of the
close vicinity of the several phone-
tic units forming the base, the
affix, the augment, the substitute
and the like, and he had to define
the word संहृितां rather differently
which he did in the words परं:
संनिकर्षः संहिता: cf P.I.4.109: cf. also
संहितैकपदे नित्या नित्या धातूपसर्गयोः | नित्य
समासे वाक्ये तु सा विवक्षामपेक्षते Sabdakau-
stubha on Maheshvara Stºtra 5.1.
सेहितापाठ the running text or the
original text of the four Vedas as
originally composed. This text,
which was the original one, was
split up into its constituent padas
Cr separate words by ancient sages
ईौनक, अात्रय and others,with a view
to facilitating the understanding of
it, and consequently to preserving
it in the oral tradition.The original
was called मूलप्रकृति of which the
पदपाठ and the क्रमपाठ which were
comparatively older than the other
artificial recitations such as the
जटापाठ, घनपाठ and others, are found
mentioned in the Pratisºkhya
works.
स्रक् augment स् added to the roots यम्
रम् , नम् as also to roots which end
in अा before affixes of the aorist
tense: e.g. अयंसीत्, व्यरंसीत्, अयासीत्,
cf P. VII. 2.73.
सकर्मक a root which, by virtue of the
nature of its meaning i.e. verbal
activity, requires or expects an
object which is covered by the
activity: a transitive root. In the
passive voice of these roots the
object is expressed by the verbal
termination and hence it is put in
the nominative case.
सकारक accompanied by tha gualify-
g words such as the different
Krakas or causal agents for the
Verbal activity: cf. अाख्यातं साक्ष्य
सूक्रार्कं सकृारकावेशेषणं वाक्यम् | सकारकम् !
ओदनं पचति ' M. Bh.ofP.ff. )
Wrt. 9.
सकृदाख्यातनिग्रीह्या capable of being
understood on being mentione
Only once.justas the notion ofgenus
9r generality which is so ufder-
stood the phrase सकृदाख्यातनिग्राह्या is
cited as a definition of जाति: cf.
सक्तूबुढानिग्राह्या गोत्रं च चरणैः सहृ, M.Bh.
on P.IV.1.63.
सछद्रत or Gढव्रतिन्याय the maxin op
99nvention of the non-application
of a grammatical rule of Operaton
any longer when, on conflict with
39therit has been once set aside.
The maxim is सकृद्वतीं विप्रतिषेधे यद्वाधितं
तद्वधितमेव M. Bh.on P. . ] 56,
4.?. 2, VI.3.42 etc. cf also Par.
Sek. Pari. 40.
सक्रियाविशेषण accompanied by a
Word qualifying the verbal acti-
wity sometimes a verb with such
a.wordmakes a sentence:cf. सक्रिय-
विदेष्णं त ववृत्युम् | सुषु पचातं [M.B}.
on P. II.1.1 Wव्रrt, 9
सगतं or सगतक accompanied by a
PrePositign which is calledगति:
cf सगतूिरपृि तिङ्क P. VIII. 1.68: .
also सगतिरपि ( प्रेपन्वति M.Bh. ca P
| VIII.1.68.
सङ्क a short term or प्रत्याहार made up
gf theस of सन् in गुानाज्कद्भ्यः सने
P.III.I.5, and the ङ्क of महृिड् in
P.III.4.78 with a view to include
all affixes from सन् to महृिङ्क: cf, साधु
इमलीति कुत्वादये न सिध्यान्त, M. Bh. on
P.VI,1.9 Vart. 7; cf also M. Bh.
on P. VIII.2.22.
स्रण tad affix खण् prescribed after the
word पयः in the sense of collection:
e. g. पाश्र्वम् : cf. पश्र्वा: सय् P,IV,2.43

सत्
Vart, 3 for which there is an alfer-
native reading पश्र्यो णर् बक्तब्यः: for
facility of grammatical operations
णस् is recommended with prefer-
ence in the Mahabhasya , cf एर्व
तर्हि णस् वक्तव्य: M.Bh. on P. IV.2.43
～ Vart. 3: (2) सण् is given as a tech-
nical term for संयेीग in the Prati-
khya works: cf. सयुक् सण् ] संयुक्तं
व्यञ्जनं संवेगसेजे भवति R.T.27.
स्रत् a short term used for the affixes
इातृ ( अत् ) and शानच् ( अान ) which
' are applied to roots to form the
' present and the future participles;
* cf. तौ सत् P III. 2. 127: cf also ट:
सद्व F III. 3. 14.
सतिइिाट prescribed subsequently;
occurring after the preceding has ]
taken place: cf. सति इिटोपि विकरणस्वर:
सार्वधातुकंस्वरं न बाधते; although the
words सति and द्रिाष्ट: are separate
'still it is habitual to take them
combined in an adjectival sense
and make the word सतिदिश्ट an
adjective to the word स्वर as in the
' dictum सतिशिष्टस्वरबलीयस्त्वं च P. VI. 1.
* 158 Vrt. 9.
सर्तिशाष्टस्वरबलीयस्त्व the compara-
tively superior strength of a subse-
Guent accent which prevails by the
emoval of the accent obtaining
' before in the process of the forma-
tion of a word; cf VI. 1. 158 Vart.
, 9. See सतिशिट् above.
स्तf existence, supreme or universal
_
existence the Uiti par excellence
which is advocated to be the final
sense of all words and expressions
in the language by Bhartphari
and other grmmarians after him
who discussed the interpretation
of words. The grammarians believe
that the ultimate sense of a word
is सत्ता which appears manifold and
,limited in our everyday experience
due to different limitations such as
् * 8 * ** : *
382 _ सत्सप्तर्षी
deSa, kala and others. Seen from
the static viewpoint, सत्ता appears
as द्रब्य while, from the dynamic
viewpoint it appears as a क्रिया. This
सन्त is the soul of everything and
it is the same as शव्दतत्त्व or ब्रह्मन् or
अस्त्यर्थ: cf. Vakyapadiya II. 12.
The static existence, further, is .
called व्यक्ति or individual with
reference to the object, and जाति
with reference to the common
form possessed by individuals.
स्र्व an aspect of सत्ता of the type.of
the static existence possessed by
substantives as contrasted with
भाव the dynamic type of exist-
ence possessed by verbs; cf. भाव-
प्रधानमाख्यातम् ! सत्त्वप्रधानानि नामानि. Nir.
I: cf also सत्त्वाभिधायकं नाम निपात:
पादपूरण: R.Pr. XII. 8. V. Pr. VIII.
50.
सत्त्वगुण qualities of a substantive
such as स्त्रीत्वं, पुंस्त्व, नपुंसकत्व, or एकत्व,
द्वित्व and बहुत्व cf. स्त्रीपुंनपुंसकानि सत्त्वगुणाः
एकत्वद्वित्वबहुवेचनानि च	M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.38 Vrt. 6, also on P. I.
2.64 Vrt, 53.
सत्वशब्द् the word सक्ध meaning द्रव्य:
cf. चादयीSसल्वे | अयं सत्त्वशब्द: अरूयव
द्रव्यपदार्थक्र:	M.Bh. on P. I. 4. 57.
सत्यश्रवोध name of commentary work
on the Sarasvataprakriy.
सत्लप्तमी the locative case prescrib>
ed by the rule यस्य च भावेन भावलक्षणम्
P. II.3.37 as scen in गोषु दुह्यमानासु
गतः; cf. ठाकं इति नेत्रा प्रसूर्मीं | कां
तर्हि ` सत्सप्तमीं | ठाके सति इति . M, Bh.
on P.I.2.49 Virt. 2. On account
of the frequent occurrence of the
word सति in a large number of
examples of this locative absolute,
the term सतिततम is used by
modern grammarians for the
better word सत्सप्तमी in the Maba-
bhasya: cf. M.Bh. on P,VI.4.23 as
also on P.VIII. 3.61...
_
' __

सदाशीव-आग्नहोत्री
388
सदाझीच-अग्निहोत्री name of a modern
" grammarian of the seventeenth
century who has written a gloss
' on Prtisakhya works called प्रति-
झारल्यदीपिक्रा.
सद्ाारीव-पण्डित a grammarian of the
seventeenth century who has
written a commentary on the
Suitras of Panini and a brief
commentary on the Mahabh-
sya called मूढार्थदीपिनी or मूढार्थ-
दीपेका which is incomplete. .
सद्ादिावभट् (धुले) a prominent gram-
< marian of the latter half of the
eighteerth century who was a
resident of Nagpur and whose
gloss on the Laghusabdenduse-
khara by name सददित्रभङ्गी is well
known to scholars.
सद्|ार्शोवभट्टी name of a commentary -
written by सदाशिवभइ धुले on the
Laghuabdendusekhara ofNageSa.
¶ lit. belonging to the same
Place; the word is used in the
sense ofimmediately near:or guite
ia proximity: cf. अनन्त्यविकारे अन्त्य-
सूदेशेस्य Pari.5ck. Pari.108.
स्रधनिर् tad, affix अधीन proposed
by the Warttikakra in the sense
of something in
that'; e.g. राजनीदं राजाधोनं; cf. तस्मा-
तत्रेदमेति सधीनर् P. V. 4.7 Vrt. 2.
The standard affix in such cases
is ख ( ईन ) by the rule अषडक्ष ...
अध्युत्तरपदात् ख: P. V. 4.7.
् (l)desiderative affix स applied to
any root in the sense of desire;
e. g. चिकीर्षति, जिहीर्षति, बुभूषति: cf
धाती: कर्मणः समानकतृकादिच्छायां वंा P.III.
1.7; (2) applied in specific senses
possessed by the root to the roots
गुप् , तिज्, कित्, मान्, बध्, दान् and
शेाने: e.g. जुगुप्सते, तितिक्षेत, चिकित्सति,
मीमांसत, बीभत्सतं, दीदांसते, इशांसते: cf.
, P. III. 1. 5 and 6. The roots to
which सन् is applied are redupli-
that or from |
cated and the reduplicated form
ending with सन् ( स ) is looked
upon as a different root from the
original one for purposes of con-
jugation, which takes, however,
comjugational affixes of the same
Pada as the original root; cf.
सनाद्यन्ता धृतधः III. 1.32.
सन्नतर graver, comparatively more
grave; a term used in connection
with a grave accent which is
followed by a vowel with an
acute or circumflex accent; e.g.
the vowel इ of सरस्वति in इमं मे गङ्ग
यमुन सरस्वति शुतुद्रि: cf. सनं दृ सलतर
इत्येतद् भवति M. Bh. on P. I. 2.33.
सन्वद्भाच behaviour like that of the
affix सन् in point of its specific fea-
tures, viz. causing reduplication in
the case of the previous root.by
the rule सन्यङोः WI.1.9, as also the
substitution of इ for अ in the
reduplicated syllable ( अभ्यास ) , by
P. VII. 4.79. This सन्वद्भाव is
prescribed in the case of a root
ending in इ ( णिच् ) before the
aorist sign ( विक्ररण ) चङ्क. cf. सन्वछलुनि
चङ्परेनग्लेप VII. 4.93.
सपादसप्ताध्यायी a term used in connec-
tion with Panini's first seven books
and a guarter of the eighth, as
contrasted with the term Tripadj,
which is used for the last three
quarters of the eighth book. The
rules or operations given in the
Tripadi, are stated to be asiddha
or invalid for purposes of the
application of the rules in the
previous portion, Viz. the Sapada-
saptadhyayi, and hence in the
formation of' words all the rules
given in the first seven chapters
and a quarter, are applied first and
then a way is prepared for the
rules of the last three quarters.
It is a striking thing that the rules

सपूव
् 384
संमय
in the Tripad mostly concern the
padas or formed words, thsPro*
ince, in fact, of the Pratisakhya
treatises, and hence they should:
as a matter of fact, be applicable
to words after their formation
and evidently to accomplish this
object, Panini has laid down the
convention of the invalidity in
Guestion by the rule पूर्वत्रासिद्धम्
P. VIII. 2,1.
o - -
सपूर्वे together with a word thatis
, put before, and not with any suffix
iike बहुच् placed bgfre: 9f तेर्नयः
{ ,प्रथमाया विभाषा. P.VIII. 1 26; सपूर्वाच्च
} }P. V. 2.87. _
सप्तम the seventh of the vowels stated
in the alphabet; a word used for
the vowel r ( ऋ ) by ancient
grammarians: cf. ओजा हृस्वा: सतमन्ता:
स्वराणाम् R. Pr. I.14.
सप्तमी ( 1 ) the seventh case; the
locative case: a term used for the
locative case by ancient grammar-
ians and Panini; cf. न सप्तम्यामन्त्रितयेः
v. Pr. III 139; cf. ईदूतौ च सप्तम्यर्थे
P. I. 1. 19. or संस्थास्त्र P. V. 3. 10;
cf also द्वितीयादयः शब्दाः पूर्वाचार्यः सुपां
त्रिकेषु स्मर्यन्ते Kas. on P. II. 3.2: ( 2 )
the seventh of the moods and
tenses; the optative mood; cf. Kat.
III. 1, 20; Hemacandra III. 3. 7.
सप्तस्वरः lit, the seven accents; the
term refers to the seven accents
formed of the subdivisions of the
three main Wedic accents उदात्त,
अनुदात्त and स्वरित vi2 उदात्त, उदात्ततर,
अनुदात्त, अनुदात्ततर्, स्वरित, स्वरितोदात्त,and
एकश्रुति: cf त एते तन्त्रे तरनिर्दशे सप्त स्वरा
भवन्ति ( उदात: ' उदात्ततर: । अनुदात्तः !
अनुदात्ततर: ' स्वरित: ' स्वरिते य उदात्तः संन्येन
विर्दिष्टः | एकश्रुतिः सप्तम: | M. Bh on
P. I. 2. 33. It is possible that
these seven accents which were
turned into the seven notes
of the chantings of the sa-
mans developed into the seven
musical notes which have tradition-
ally come down to the present
day known as सा रे ग म प ध नी: cf.
उदांत निषादगान्धारौ अनुदात्त ऋषभधैवतौ !
स्वरितप्रभवा ह्यते षड्जमध्यमपञ्चमुाः	Pan.
Siksa. The Vajasaneyi Pratisakhya
mentions the seven accents differen-
tly: cf. उदात्तादयः परे सत | यथा-आभनि-
हृितक्षेप्र-प्राश्छद्य-तेरोव्यञ्जन-्तैरोविराम-पादवृत-
ताथाभाब्या: Uvvata on V.Pr.I.l l4.
सप्ताध्यायी a term used for the first
seven chapters or books of Paninis
grammar; cf. यन्य_सताध्याय्याः सुव्रराते
नं संगृहृताः स्यु: M. Bh. on P. VI 1.'
158Vart. 1.
सम equal in number , to something
given: cf. यथासंख्यमनुदेशः समानाम् cf.
K.. on P. I. 3.10.
समन्तभद्र a Jain scholar of great
repute who is believed to have
written, besides many well-known
religious books such as अप्तमीमांसा
गन्धहृस्तिभाष्य etc. on Jainism, a
. treatise on grammar called Cint-
mani Vyakarana.
समन्वयप्रदीपसंकेत a treatise on the
philosophy of Vyakarana written
as a commentary by the author
दंवइार्मन् on his own Krikas on the
subject.
समभिव्याहृप्र utterance together of
several vocal elements or words;
verbal concomitance; cf अनया परि-
भाषया स्त्रीप्रत्ययसमभिव्यहृर तद्रहिते दृष्टानां ...
पर्याप्तत्वमतिदिश्यते Par. Sek. Pari. 71.
समाभइार repetition of an action; in-
tensity of an action. पौनःपुन्यं भृशार्थे
वा समभिहृार: Kas. on P. III. 1. 22.
समय the omission of words which
have already occurred before in
the recital of the Pada and other
Paghas or recitals, with a view to
avoiding an unnecessary repetition
cf.दृष्टक्रमत्वात्समयान् संदध्यात् सर्वाः क्रमे पदेन
व पदाभ्यां च प्रागवसेयदतीत्य व R.Pr.X.12.

समर्थ 385
समान
समर्थ (1) having an identical sense;
S. K. on P.WI. 4.11.
cfप्रोपाभ्या समर्थाभ्याम् ***तौ तावत् प्रोपौ समर्थ समर्थाधिकार the province or thejuris-
तुल्यार्थं भवत:	क वानयेस्तुल्यार्थता | आदि-
क्रमणे | Kas. on P. I. 3. 42: (2)
mutually connected in meaning in
such a way that the meanings are
connected together or commixed
together; समर्थ: इाक्वः । विग्रहृवाक्या-
थाभिधान यः इाक्तः स समर्थावदित्यः अथवा |
समर्थपदाश्रयत्वात्समर्थः ) समर्थानां पदानां |
सेबद्धार्थानां संसृष्टार्थीनां विधिर्वेदितव्य: | Kas. ]
on P. II. 1. I: cf also एकार्थींभावो
ब्यपक्षा वा सामथ्र्यम्: (3) connected with
diction of the rule समर्थानां प्रथमाद्वा
(F. IV. 1. 82), all the three words
in which continue further on,
and become valid in every rule
upto the end of the second pada
of the fifth adhyaya; cf. समर्थानां
प्रथमाद्वा I त्रयमप्यधिक्रियते समर्थानामिति च
प्रथमादिति च वेति च | स्वार्थकप्रत्ययावधिश्रा-
यमधिक्रार: | प्राग्दिशो विभक्तिरिति यावत् |
स्वार्थिकेषु ह्यस्य उपयोगे नास्ति | विकल्पेपि
तत्रानवस्थितः | Ks. on P.IV.1.82.
relationship of senses, as between | समवस्थित appearing together, pre-
the activity and the subject,object,
instrument etc., or as between the
master and the servant or the
senting themselves together cf.
द्वयेईि _ सावकाज्ञायेोः समवस्थितयेर्विप्रतिषेधी
भवति | M. Bh. on P. I. 1.3 Vart 6.
Possessor and the possessed: cf. राजं: | समवाय (I) combination as contras-
पुरुष: or ग्रामं गच्छति,or सर्पिः पिब, but not
सर्पिः पिब in the sentence तिष्ठतु सर्पिः
पिब त्वमुदकम् | : (4) capable of ex-
pressing the sense e. g. a word
with the sandhis well observed; cf.
समर्थानां प्रथमाद्वा | सामथ्र्यं परिनिष्ठितत्वम् |
क्तसान्धकार्यत्वमिति यावत् | S. K. on IV.
I. 82; rf also समर्थः पटुः शक्तः इति
पर्यायाः शाक्तत्वं च कार्योत्पादनंयेौम्यत्वम् etc.
Balamanorama on the above.
समर्थनीय that which can be justified;
justifiable; एकेन वा द्रव्यवत्त्वमिति समर्थनी-
यम्, Kas. on P. V. 2. 118.
ted with ब्यवाय disjunction or sepa-
ration; (2) the enumeration of
the letters ' of the alphabet in a
particular order so as to facilitate
their combination, technically
termed प्रत्याहृार: cf. वृतिसमवायार्थ उपदेशः
का पुनवृति: l शास्त्रप्रवृत्तिः | अथ कः
समवायः ， वर्णानामानुपूर्व्येणं संनिवज्ञा:	M.
Bh. Ahnika l Wart. 15. cf. also
समवाये वर्णगत: क्रमविरेष:	Uddyota on
the Bhasya mentioned above; (3)
contact; cf रतै रागः समवाय स्वराणाम्
R. Pr. XIV.24.
समर्थपाद् name given by Sradeva |समसण्tad. affix समम् applied to the
and other grammarians to the first
pada of the second adhyaya of
Paninis Asgadhyy which begins
with the sutra समर्थः पदविाध: P.II.1.1.
समर्थविभाक्त a case which is appro-
word इदम् to form the word पेषम:
meaning * this year '; cf. इदमः
समसण् | इदम: समसण् प्रत्ययेा निपात्यत
संवत्सरभिधेय , आस्मन्संवत्सर एषम: । M.Bh.
on P. V. 3.22 Virt. 3.
priate to express the sense of the | समागम concourse, coming in close
tad. affix prescribed; e.g. तस्यापत्यम् |
quarters; cf. साङ्गसमागम R.T. 224.
तस्येति षष्ठी समर्थविभात:: cf. P. IV.1.92: | समाधान, समाध, reply to remove the
तेन रक्तं रागात् | तेनति तृतीया समर्थविभक्तिः ;
objection conclusion.
cf P. IV. 2.1 ; cf.प्रकृता समर्थविभक्तिरनु-| समान common: the same: cf. समान-
वर्तते तस्येदामेति | M. Bh. on P. IV. 3.
134 Vart. 2.
समर्थस्त्र the rule समर्थः पदविधिः P. II. |
1.l.cf. समर्थसूत्र उद्वातार इति भाष्यप्रयोगात्
49
स्थानकरणा नासिक्यैोष्ठथाः | एतेषां यदव स्थानं
तदव करणम्: W. Pr. I. 80. समानश्च
खदविगमे गम्यायां च अगम्यायां व M. Bh.
on Ahmika 1.

समानकर्दक 386
समानकर्दक having got the same agent:
the word is used in connection
with actions ( क्रिया ) having the
same , agent of the activity; cf.
समानकर्तृकेषु तुमुन् P. III. 3. 158.
समानपद् the same word as contrasted
with fभलपद a compound word
which consists oftwo or more words.
cf. रषाभ्यां नो णः समानपदे P. VIII.4.1.
समानाक्षर simple vowels or monoph-
thongs अ, इ and उ as contrasted
with diphthongs ( संध्यक्षर ); cf अष्टौ
समानाक्षराण्यादितस्ततश्चत्वारि संध्यक्षराण्युत्तराणि
R. Pr. I. 11, cf. also अथ नवादितस्स-
मानाक्षराणि T. Pr. [. 2. Some writers
ofPrtiskhyas held ऋ as संध्यक्षर and
not as समानाक्षरे; cf अन्यतु मतम्-ऋकारा-
दीनां त्रयाणां त्व्ररद्वयसंधिरूपत्वाभावेपि रूपद्वयस-
द्रावदषा संज्ञा न युक्तति नवानामवाहेति !
gloss on T. Pr. I. 2.
समानाघकरण words which have got
the same individual object ( द्रव्य )
referred to by means of their own
sense,and which are put in the same
case; co-ordinate words; cf. तत्पुरुष:
समानाधिकरणः कर्मधारयः P. I. 2.42:cf.
अधिकरण्ाब्द: अfभधयवाचीं तां समानाधिकरण:
समानाभिधेयः [ Kas. on P. I, 2.42.
समानाश्रय having got the same
wording to operate on the word
is used in connection with opera-
tions which occur in the Same
word or wording as contrasted
with ब्याश्रय;cf.समानाश्रय क्यै तदसिद्धं स्यात्
S. K. on P. VI. 4.22: cf. also अत्रेति
समानाश्रयप्रतिपत्त्यर्थम् Kas. on P.VI,4,22.
समापत्ति restoration of the resultant to
the original, as for instance, resto-
ration of the padapatha and the
kramapatha to the Samhitapgha:
cf. प्रकृतिदर्शने समापत्तिः A. Pr. III. I.7.
समाम्नाय traditional enumeration or
list of words or letters; cf. अक्षर्-
समाम्नाय, वर्णसमाम्नाय, दाब्द्समाम्नाय etc.;
cf अथते वर्णसमाम्नायं व्याख्यास्याम: V.
Pr. VIII.1. अथ व्रणेसमाम्नाय: T. Pr. I.
समस्सचक्र
l : cf also समाम्नायः समाम्नात: स व्याख्या-
तब्य: Nir.I.i. समाम्नायः पाठक्रम: | Conn.
on T. Pr. I. 1.
_K_~ _
समारापत superimposed: secondary
notion.
समावेइ placing together at one place,
simultaneous application,generally
with a view that the two or more
things so placed, should always go
together although in a few
instances they may notgo together:
cf. तदधीते तद्वद्	नेतयोरावश्यंक्रः संम्वइः !
भवतेि हिं क्राश्वत्सं पाठं पठति न च चेति |
क्राश्चच्च बत्ति न च से पाठं पठति | M. Bh.
on P.IV.2.59;cf. also ब्याकरणेपि क्रर्तव्यं
हृर्तव्यभित्यत्र प्रत्ययकृत्कृत्यसंज्ञानां समधिज्ञो भवति
M. Bh. on P. I.4.1.
सम[स्र placing together of two or
more words so as to express a
composite sense ; compound com-
position cf. पृथगर्थानामक्रथींभाच: समासः
Although the word समास in its
derivafive sense is applicable to
any wording which has a composite
sense (वृति), still it is by convention
applied to the समासवृति only by
virtue of the Adhikarastra प्राक्
क्रडारात् समास: which enumerates
in its province the cempound
words only. The Mahabhisya-
kira has mentioned only four
principal kinds of these compo-
unds and defined them; cf. पूर्वपदार्थ
प्रधानेब्ययीभावः , उत्तरपदार्थप्रधानस्तत्पुरुषः )
अन्यपदार्थप्रधाने बहुव्रीहिः | उभयपदार्थप्रधाने
इन्द्वः l M.Bh. on P.II.1.6; cf. also
M.Bh. on P.II.1.20, II.1.49,II.2.6,
II.4.26, V.1.9. Later grammarians
have given many subdivisions of
these compounds as for example
द्विगु, क्रमेधारयand तत्पुरुष (with द्वितीयोत-
त्पुरुध, तृतीयात्पुरुष etc.as also अवयवतत्पुरुष,
उपपदतलुपुरुषand so on) समानाधिकरणबहु-
त्रीहि, ब्यधिकरणबहुव्रीहृि, संख्यावहुवीहृि, सम-
हृारद्वन्द्व, इतरेतरद्वन्द्व and so on.
समासचक्र a short anonymous treatise

समासमञ्जरी
387
समदृकः
on compounds which is very popu-
lar and useful for beginners. The
work is attributed to वररुावे and
called also as स्लमस्पटल. The work
is studied and committed to
memory by beginners of Sanskrit ]
studies in the PathaSalas of the old
type.
समासमञ्जरी a metrical work on
compounds which has no author
mentioned in or assigned to it.
समासवाद (l) a short treatise on com-
pounds by गेविन्दचक्रबर्तिन् ; (2) a
small compendium on compounds
written by a grammarian narned
सार्वभेम.
समासशेाभ a short treatise on compo-
unds by यश:सागर.
समासान्त secondary suffixes which are
prescribed at the end of compounds
in specific cases and which are look-
ed upon as taddhita affixes;e.g.the
Samasnta इच् ( अ ), causing elision
of the last syllable of the compo-
und word, is added to compounds
called संख्याबहुव्रीह्यि: e.g. उपदशाः,पञ्चषाः
etc. P.W.4.73. Samasanta अ is
added to compounds ending with
ऋब्,पुर्, अपु, and धुर,and अच् to words
ending with सामन् , लेष्मन् , अक्षन् , चतुर्
पुस् , अनडुहृ, मनस् , वर्चस्, तम् , श्रयस् ,
रहुसे, उर्, गी, तावत्, अध्वन् , etc :under
specific conditions; cf P.V.4.68 to
86. अव् ( अ ) is added at the end
of the tatpuru8a compounds to
the words अङ्कगुलि, and रानि, under
specific conditions; cf. P.V-!.86,
' 87: टच् ( अ ) is added at the end
of tatpurusa compounds ending
in राजन् , अहृन् , साव , गे, and उरस्
and under specific conditions to
those ending in तक्षन् , श्वन् , साथ, नैौ,
खारी, and अज्जाले as also to words
ending in अस् and अन् in the neuter
gender in Vedic Literature, and to
the word ब्रह्मन् underspecific condi-
tions: cf. P.V. 4.91 to 105: टच् is
added at the end ofसमाहृारद्वन्द्व com-
pounds ending in क् , च् , ज्, , ， ,
द्, धू and ， and at the end of
अव्ययीभाव compounds ending with
the words ढारद् , विप् , अनिट् , and
मनस् etc. as also at the end of
words ending in अन् or with any
of the class consonants except
< nasals, cf. P.V.4.106-ll2; षच् ( अ ) is
added to Bahuvrihi compounds
ending with साथ and अक्षि as limbs
of the body, as also with अड्गुलि,
while ष् , अप् and अच् are added
to specified words under special
conditions; the Samasnta affix
असिच् ( अस् ) is added at the end of
a Bahuvrºhi compound ending in
प्रज, and मध, the Samasanta affix
इच् is added at the end of the
peculiar Bahuvrihi compound
formed of दण्ड, मुसल etc. when they
are repeated and when they show
a fight with the instruments of
fight exchanged; cf. P. V.4. l 13-
128. Besides these affixes, a general
समासान्त affix कप् is added necessarily
or optionally as specified in P.V.
4.15 1-159.
समासान्तशाब्ददेश a substitute for a
word or its part at the end of a
compound prescribed for certain
specified words under specified
conditions; e. g- शु for जानु , ऊधन्
for ऊधस् , धन्वन् for घनुस्, जानि for जाया,
गान्ध for गन्ध, पाद् and पद्, for पाद,
, दत् for दन्त, ककुद् for ककुद: cf P. V.
4.129-150.
समासान्तोदात्त the acute accent pres-
cribed in general at the end of
compounds excepting the Pahu-
vr्hi and some specified compo-
unds: cf. P.VI.1.223 and VI.2. ]
to end. -
समाहृणं collection, collective notion
which is one of the four senses of
the indeclinable |ुव. The collective

समुचय
388 सरूप
motion by nature being single, the
dvandva compound formed of
words showing such a collection
takes the neuter gender and singu-
lar number affixescf.यदा तिरेहृितावयव-
विवक्षा संहृति: प्रधानं तदा समाहृार: Siradeva
Pari. 16: cf. also P. II.2.29 and
II. 1. 51.
समुच्चय accumulation which is one of
the four senses of the indeclinable च
and which means the anticipation
ofam allied another by the express
mention of or.e, in which sense
the Dwamdva compound prescrib-
ed by the rule चार्थे द्वन्द्वः does not
take place: cf. समुच्चय: | प्लक्षश्च इत्युक्ते
गम्यत एतलयग्रोधश्चेति M. Bh. on P. II.
2.29 Wart. 15.
समुदाय aggregate, totality, collection
of individual members: cf. समुद्थ
प्रवृत्ताः शब्दाः कचिदवयवेष्वपि वर्तन्ते also
cf. समुदयं व्याकरणश्ाब्दः अवयवे नोपपद्यते
M.Bh. Ahnika 1 Vart, 14: cf. also
समुदाये वाक्यपरिसमाप्तिःPar.Sek.Pari.108.
समुद्दा specific individual mention
or discussion; the term is used .in
connection with the several sec.
tions of the third Kana or book
of Bhartrharis Vakyapadya.
समुपस्थापन , simultaneous presenta-
tion of different grammatical
operations; cf. वसुसंप्रसारणादीनामाभाऊछा-
स्त्रीयाणामव असिद्धत्वादन्तरङ्गयायुगपत्समुपस्थाने
नास्तीति परिभाषा न प्रवर्तते | Ks,6n P.
VI.4.22.
समुपस्थित presenting themselves si-
multaneously; the word is used in
connection with two grammatical
operations which present them-
selves simultaneously.
सम्इ aggregate, group or collec-
tion} one of the prominent senses
in which the tad. affixes अणु and
others are prescribed. These
affixes are called # 9- 8-
, क्राकम् (काकानां समूहः ) similarly भेक्षम्,
राजकम्, केदार्यम्, जनता, मायूरम्, पाद्या, रथ्या
etc. cf. P. IV. 2.37 to 51.
सयुक् connected, the word was used
by ancient grammarians in the
sense of संयुक्त: cf. सयुक् सणु R.T. 27.
सर Undi affix सर mentioned in the
rule तितुत्रतथसिसुसरकसेषु च P. VII. 2.7.
e.g.अक्षरम्: cf. अनेःक्सरन्Uadi.III.70.
सरक्, सरन् (क्सरन् ) Undi affix सर e.g.
क्सेरः, धूसरः, वसेम्, तर्तम् cf. Undi III.
70-77.
सरला name of a comparatively
modern lucid commentary written
by Tarnatha Tarkavicaspati on
the Siddhantakaumudi.
सरस्वतीकण्ठाभरण called also सरस्वतीसूत्र,
name of a voluminous grammar
work ascribed to king Bhoja in
the eleventh century. The gram-
mar is based very closely on Pani-
ni's Asadhyayi, consisting of eight
chapters or books. Although the
affixes, the augments and the sub-
stitutes are much the same, the
order of the Stºtras is considerably
changed. By the anxiety of the
author to bring together, the nece-
ssary portions of the Ganapatha,
the Undiptha and the Pari-
bhass, which the author' has
included in his eight chapters, the
book instead of being easy to un-
derstand, has lost the element of
brevity and become tedious for
reading. Hence it is that it is not
studied widely. For details see pp.
392, 393 Vyakarana Mahabhasya
Vo]. VII. D. E. Society's edition.
सरूप ( 1) having the same form for
practical purposes such as the form
अा po.sessed by टापु, डाप् and वाप्र or
the form अ possessed by the affixes
अणु, अव्, घ, क, ण and others; (2)
having the same form even literally,
but possessed of different senses;
e. g the words माष, अक्ष, पादetc.

सर्वेत्र 389
समानानामेकशेष इत्युच्यमाने यत्र सर्वं समानं
शब्देर्थश्च तत्रैव स्यात् | वृक्षाः प्लक्षाः ईति | इहृ
न स्यात् ， अक्ष: पादाः माषाः इति ) रूपग्रहृणे
पुनः क्रियमाणे न दोषो भवति | M. Bh. on
P. I. 2.64.
सर्वत्र lit. at all places, on all occa-
sions; the word is used in connec-
tion with an essential application
of a rule and not optionally in
some cases; cf. सर्वत्र लोहितादिकतन्तभ्यः
पूर्वेण नित्य प्रति विकल्पार्थं वचनम् Kas. on
P. IW. 1.18: cf. also प्रत्यये भाषायां
नित्यवचनम् P. VIII.4.45 Vart. 1, सर्वत्र
दाकल्यस्य WHII. 4.51. etc.
सर्वथा at all costs, in any case, in all
places; cf. सवैथावरकालैव M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.69 Wart 4: cf. also तथा तेषां
घोषिण: सर्वथेाष्मभि: XII.2.
सर्वेनामन् pronoun: lit. standing for
any noun. There is no definition
as such given, of the word pron-
oun, but the words, called pro-
nouns, are enumerated in Panini's
grammar one after another in
the class or group headed by
सर्व ( सर्व, विश्व, उभे, उभय, words end-
ing in the affixes डतर and डतम, अन्य
etc.)which appear to be pronouns
primarily. Some words such as पूर्व,
पर, अवर, दक्षिण, उत्तर, अपर, अधर, स्व,
अन्तर etc are treated as pronouns
under certain conditions. In any
case, attention has to be paid to
the literal sense of the term सर्वनामन्
, which is an ancient term and none
of these words when standing as a
proper noun, is to be treated as a
pronoun: cf. सर्वादीनि सर्वनामानि P. I.1.
27, cf. also संज्ञोपसर्जनीभूतास्तु न सर्वादयः:
M.Bh. on P. I. 1. 27 Vart. 2; ( 2 )
, The word सर्वनामन् means also a
common term, a gencral term; cf.
एकश्रुतिः स्वरसर्वनाम, यथा नपुसकं लिङ्गसर्वनाम
M. Bh. on P. VI. 4.174 Vart 4.
सर्वनामस्थान a term used in Painis
: . grammar, for the first five case-
सर्वेप्रसंङ्ग
affixes सु, ओी, अस्, अम् and औ as also
for the nom. and acc. pl. afix
इ ( शि ) of the neuter gender. The
term appears to be an old one,
which was used, by a specific men-
tion, for the first five case-affixes
which caused a special change in
the base before them in the case
ofmany words; cf. शि सर्वनामस्थानम् I
सुडनपुंसकस्य P.I.1.42-48. For details
see Vyakaratamahabhasya Vol.
WHI. D. E. Society's ed. p. 239
footnote.
सर्वेनिघात grave accent ( अनुदात्त ) fot
the whole word, generally for a
verbal form or a word in the voca-
tive case, if preceded by another
word which is not a verb. The
terrn is used in contrast with
देाषनिघात the grave accent for the
remaining vowels of a word when
a particular vowel is definitely fix-
ed as an acute or an independent
Swarita or circumflex; cf. P.WIII.
1.28 to 74.
सवेपद्देशा a substitute for the entire
word and not for a part of it.
This doctrine of सर्वपदादेई every-
where is advocated by gramma-
rians in consonance with their
doctrine of इाब्दनित्यत्व; cf. सर्वे सर्व-
पददद्दा दाक्षीपुत्रस्य पाणिनेः | एकदेदावेकर
हृि नित्यत्वं नोपपद्यत | M.Bh. on P. I. 1.
20, WII.;.27.
सवेप्रतिषेघ a general prohibition of
every grammatical operation that
presents itself; cf. नान्त:पादमिति
सर्वप्रतिषेधः | M.Bh. on P.VI.1.115.
सवेप्रसङ्ग a presentation of all the
substitutes for all the original ones
indiscriminately; an application in
all cases irrespective of any special
consideration: cf. स्थाानेन एकत्वनिर्द-
इादनेक्रादेशानिर्ददााच सर्वप्रसङ्ग: M.Bh.on P.
I. 1. 50 Wart. l and 12; cf also
M.Bh. on P.I.1.60, I.3.2, 3,10etc

सर्वेपातपदिक 3
सर्वेप्रातिपदिक any noun-base irrespec-
tive of any discrimination; cf. अपरं
अाह्य सर्वप्रातिपादेकेभ्य अन्चारे किव्वक्तब्येाश्वति
गर्दभतीत्येवमर्थम् M.Bh. on P. III. 1.1 1
Wart, 3.
सर्वमङ्गला a commentary on NageSa's
Paribhasendusekhara written by a
grammarian of the nineteenth cen-
tury named इाषामेन् or मनीपिंदाष्मन्.
The work is incomplete.
सवेमुखस्थान the whole orifice of the
mouth as a place of utterance, as
for example for the vowel अ: cf.
सर्वमुखस्थानमेवर्णमक इच्छन्ति I M.Bh. on
P. I. 1.9 Vart. 2.
सर्वेरक्षित spelt as दार्वरक्षित also; a
Buddhist grammarian who is beli-
eved to have redacted or revised
the grammar work Durghatvrtti of
Saranadeva.
सवैलकार the personal affixes in gene-
ral pertaining to all the ten laka-
ras लट् , लिट् etc., cf. सर्वलकाराणामपवादः !
Kas.on P.III. 3.144.
सवेळिङ्गता use in all the genders; cf.
सर्वलिङ्गता च वक्तव्या | ब्राह्मणार्थं पर्यः |
बाह्मणार्थं सुप: | ब्राह्मणार्थे यवागृः |
सर्वेळीप the elision of the entire word-
ing instead of the final letter only,
which is prescribed by P. I.1. 52,
cf. तुः सर्वस्ये ल्पी बक्तव्यः अन्त्यस्य लेपो मां
भुदति | M Bh. on P. VI. 4.154.
सर्ववर्मन spelt as इर्ववर्मन् also, the re-
puted author of the Kitantra
Vyakarana. He is believed to have
been a contemporary of the poet
Gunadbya at theSitavahana court,
and to have revised and redacted
the Katantra Stºtras already exist-
ing for the benefit of his patron.
With him began the Katantra
school of grammar, the main con-
tribution to which was made by
दुर्गसिंहृ who wrote a scholarly gloss
on the Katantra Sitras. For details
see कातन्त्र,
सवोपाधिव्यभिचारे
c_~
_ ऋ -
lit ending with all
cases the term is used as an adje-
ctive of the word समास and refers
to a compound which can be dis-
solved by putting the first member
in any case: cf सर्वविभक्त्यन्तः समासे
यथा विज्ञायत | अल: परस्य विधि:: अलि विधि-
रित्यादि M. Bh. on P.I.1.56.
सर्वेस्यद्वपाद् conventional name given
to the first pida of the eighth
adhyaya of Papini's Astadhyay
which begins with the Sutra सर्वस्य
द्व VIII.1.1.
सवौदि lit. a group or a class of
words beginning with the word
सर्व as the first word in the
list; the term is used in general as
a synonymous term with Sarva-
nman; cf. संज्ञोपसर्जनीभूतास्तु न सर्वादयः
Kas. on P.I.1.27.
c-x -
स्रवदंशा a substitute for the entire
wordung instead of the final letter
as prescribed by the rule अलेान्त्यस्य
P.I.1.52; cf. अनक्राळीत्सर्वेस्य P.I.1.55.
सवोनुदान्त the grave accent for the
entire word. See सर्वनिधात.
सवौन्त्य final of all those that are
denoted or enumerated; cf. यदेव
सर्वान्त्यमर्थादेर्ज्ञानं तस्यैव विधेयं स्यात् / M.Bh.
om P. IV.2.67.
सर्वेपसर्जन all theconstituent members
of which (compound) are subordi-
nated to duite a different word
and not mutually in the manner
of one member to another. The
Bahuvrihi compound, as contrast-
ed with other compounds, is des-
cribed to be such an one, as all its
members are subordinate in sense
to another word; cf. यस्य सर्वे अवयवा
उपसर्जनीभूताः स सर्वोपसर्जने बहुव्रीहेर्गुह्यते ;
KS. on P.VI. 3.82.
सर्वेपाधिव्यभिचारार्थ a term used by
the authors of the Kasik in conne-
ction with the application of a
rule irrespective of all limitations

सलिङ्ग
891
सहृवरित
and not of any one limitation: cf.
अन्यभ्योपि दृढयत । आपइाब्दः सर्वोपाधिव्यभि-
चारार्थ: Ks. on P.III. 2.75;cf also
KS. on P.II.1.32, III.2.10l, WII.
1.38.
सलिङ्ग inclusive of the notion of
gender; the word is used in con-
nection with the sense of a Prati-
padika or a crude base as
inclusive of the notion of gender |
and number: cf. अर्थग्रहृणस्येतत् प्रयेाजनं
कृत्स्नः पदार्थे यथाभिधीयेत सद्रव्यः सालेङ्गः
ससंख्यश्चेति | M. Bh. on P. II. 2 24
Wव्रrt. 8.
सवचन with the notion of mumber
included in the sense of the base
itself; see सलिङ्ग.
सवगे belonging to the same class of
letters; cf. उता सवर्गः | उकारेण लक्षित
आदिः सहृ वगेण ग्राह्यः | चेः कु: | Candra
I. I. 2.
सवणे cognate, homophonic: a lctter
belonging to the same technical
category of letters possessing an
identical place of utteratce and
internal effort cf. तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं सवर्णम्
P. 1, 1. 9. For example, the eigh-
teen varieties of अ, due to its
short, long and protracted nature
as also due to its accents and
nasalization, are savarna to each
other. The vowels ऋ and ल are
prescribed to be considered as
Savarna although their place of
utterance difers. The consonants
in each class of consonants are
savarna to one another, but by
the utterance of one, another
cannot be taken except when
the vowel उ has been applied
to the first. Thus कु stands
for क्, ख्, ग्, व् and ङ्क. cf. तुल्यास्यप्रयत्ने
सवर्णम् P. 1, I. 9
वाप्रत्यय: P. I. 1. 69.
and अणुदित्सवर्णस्य |
|
सवर्णग्रहण taking or including the |
cognate letters; a convention of
grammarians to understand by the
utterance of a vowel like अ, इ or उ
all the 18 types of it which are
looked upon as cognate ( सवर्ण ),
as also to understand all the five
consonants of a class by the utter-
ance of the first consonant with उ
added to it: e. g. कु denoting all
the five consonants क्, ट्, ग्, घ् and
ङ्क: cf. अणुदित्सवर्णस्य चाप्रत्यंय: P.I. 1.69.
सवर्णदीर्ध the lengthened form of a
vowel which is substituted for two
cognate vowels coming near each
other; cf. अकः सवर्ण दीधे:. P. VI.
l. 10l.
सविघ of the same kind;
the same accent.
सविभाक्तक with the suitable case-affix
added; cf. प्रयाजाः सविभक्तिकाः कार्याः
M. Bh. in Ahnika 1.
ससेख्य possessed of the same number
एकवचन, द्विवचन or बहुवचन: cf. कृत्स्न:
पदार्थाभिधीयेत सद्रव्यः सलिङ्गः ससंख्य: | M.
Bh. on P. II. 2. 24 Vनrt. 8.
सस्थान having got an identical place
of utterance; the word is much
used in the Pratisakhya works; cf.
सरथानेन चेषिणां घर्षिणैव R. Pr. XIII. 5.
सस्थानतरt more sasthana i. e. nearer
among those that have the same
sthana or place of production; cf.
ननु च एड: सस्थानतरी अर्धकाराघींकारौ M.
Bh. on P. I. 1.48 Vart. 3.
सस््र lit. connected with a vowel;
the term is used in connection
with a consonant as connected
with a vowel for purposes of
syllabication, the vowel being
euther the previous one or the
succeeding one.
सहृवारेत going together: occurring
together; e. g. विपराभ्यां जेः ( where
परा is taken as the preposition परा
and not the pronoun परा which is
the fem. base of पर on account of
the paribhaa उहृचरितासहृचरितये: सहृच-
having

सहृविवक्षा
392
साधूक्तंम
रितयैव ग्रहणम्): cf. Pari.Sck.Pari.103.
सह्यविवक्षा the same as युगपद्विवक्षा,the de-
sire to put guite closely with each
other: cf. सहृविवक्षायामक्रझषः | युगपद्वि-
वक्षायामेकशेषेण भवितव्यम् M. Bh on P.
I. 2.64 Vart 19, I. 2.105 Vart. 5.
सर्हीक्ति simultaneous expression of
words as found in the Dvandva
compound; cf. सहोक्तौ द्वन्द्व: Hem.
III. 1.117.
सांख्य a rule or a topic concerning
number: cf. यदि तर्हि कृत्स्नः पदार्थाभि-
धयित लेङ्गाः सांख्याश्च विधयेो न सिध्यन्ति,
M. Bh. on P. II. 2 24 Vart. 8,9.
सांग्रह्यसूत्रक a student of संग्रहृसूत्र; the
word occurs in the Mahabhasya
along with वार्तिकसूत्रक, and it may
therefore mean a student of the
stupendous work mamed the Sarh-
graha of व्याडि which is believed
to have " consisted ofsmall num-
erous stralike assertions, with
an exhaustive gloss thereon. See
संग्रहृ.
सांन्यासिक lit. placed as a deposit,
i.e. without any special purpose
for the time being: the word is
used in connection with a word
in a rule which apparently is
superfluous; cf. तदतन्नित्यग्रहृणं सांन्यासिकं
तिष्ठतु तावत् M. Bh. on P. VII. 1.81 ;
cf also M. Bh. on III. 2.107, VI.
1.8; VII. 2.86.
सांप्रतिक (l) what is actually expre-
ssed .or found in the context: cf.
सांप्रातकाभावे भूतपूर्वगतिर्विज्ञायते M. Bh on
P. VI. 1.177 Vart. 1: (2) original,
found in the original context of
Prakrti; cf. सांप्रातके प्रकृतिस्थ कण्ठ सति
हृकारो नाम बाह्यः प्रयत्नः क्रियते T. Pr. II.
6 (3) of the present time: cf.
Purus. Pari. 15.
सांदृितिक original, as belonging to the
Sarmhitapatha of the Sitras and
not introduced for some additional
purpose without forming a part
of the actual affix; cf. अाकर्षीत् ष्ठट् |
इहु कूषां चित्सुहृितिकं षत्वं केषांचींबदे
M. Bh. on P. IV. 4.9.
साकच्क together with the affix अ=
which is inserted in a pronoti
after its last vowel; cf. साकच्काद्वा
सावैक्वप्रातषेधो वक्तव्यः | असकं असुक्:
M. Bh. on P. VII. 2.107: cf.Talso
क्रिमः क्र: । साकच्कस्याप्ययमींदांः | K,
on P. WII. 2.108.
साकाङ्क्ष possessed of an expectancy
in meaning: cf. भेवत् पूर्वं परमाकाङ्क्षतीतेि
साकाङ्क्षे स्यात्परं तु कथे साकाङ्क्षम् M. Bh.
on P. III. 2.114.
सागमक possessed of the augment: cf.
अनागमकानां सागमका अादेश्ाा: M. Bh. on
P. I. 1.20 Vart. 5, also on P. I.
1.46; cf also the verse सर्वे सर्वपदादेशा
दाक्षीपुत्रस्य पाणिनेः | एकदाधिकारे हि नित्यत्वं
नेपपद्यते , guoted in the Mahabha-
Sya to support the view that aug-
Iments are*not inserted, buta
word with an augment replaces
a word withoutthat augment; cf.
M. Bh. on P. I.1.20 Vart 5.
साति (l) tad. affix in the sense of
entirety with respect to the occu-
rrence of a thing where it was
not before e. g. उदकसाद्भवति लवणम्,
आमसाद् भवति cf. P. V. 4.52, 53:
(2) tad.affix in the sense of *hand-
ing over or *entrusting': e.g.राजसाद्
भवति, ब्राह्मणसात् करोति, cf. P. V. 4.55.' .
स्रक्व of a substantive, belonging
to the object: cf. सत्त्वस्य इदम् , अपि
बा मेदसश्च प्रोताश्च सत्त्वं द्विवचनं स्यात् |
Nir. VI. 16.
साधक instrument of an activity: c.
सर्वणि कारकाणि साधक्रानि M. Bh. on
I. 1.42; cf also साधकं निर्वर्तकं कारकसंज्ञे
भवतीति वक्तव्यम् M. Bh. on I. 4.23.
See the word कारक above.
स्राभ्रकतम most efficient in the accom-
plishment ofan action; the karaka
called Karana: cf. साधकतमं करणम् |
P. I. 4.42. See the word करण.

संाधन
393
सामथ्ये
साधन the same as साधक or क्रारक्र
which see above: cf.साधनं च क्रियायाः |
क्रियाभावात्साधनाभाव: M. Bh. on P. I.
3. i Wart. 1; cf also पूर्वं धातुः
साधनेन युज्यते पश्चादुपसर्गेण and itsopp6-
site maxim also, पूर्वं धातुरुपसर्गेण युज्यत
पश्चात्साधनेन M. Bh. 6n P VI. 1.135.
Wrt. 9, cf also Siradeva pari. 128,
129.
संIधारण common, conveying a com-
on notion;_cfः साधारणान्युत्तराणि षट्
दिवश्चादित्यस्य च Nir II. 13.
स्लधरून्दर a scholar of grammar who
was a pupil of साधुकीर्तिप्रवर and
who wrote a short work on
grammar named उक्तिरत्नाक्रर.
सानुनासिक nasalized; uttered partly
through the nose: cf. सान्तर्हि यणः
सानुनासिका निरनुनासिकाश्च M. Bh. on
P. VI. 1. 67.
साठबन्ध् or सनुबन्धक्र an affix or a root
or the like, to which a mute letter
has been attached; cf. निरनुबन्धकग्रहणे
न सानुबन्धकस्य ग्रहृणम् Par.Sek, Pari.81.
सापवादक् an injunction accompanied
by a rule or rules of exception. It
is a convention that an injunctive
rule gets its sense completed when
prohibitions or exceptions to it
have been fully considered: hence
the convention runs, प्रकल्प्य वापुवाद-
विषयं तत उत्सर्गोभिनिविशत	Par. Sek.
Pari 63; cf also सापवादकः स विधिरयं
पुनर्निरपवादक: M. Bh. on P. IV. 3.
155, VI, 2. 177; VIII. 1. 68.
सापेक्ष with an expectancy in sense;
although in grammar expectancy
is at the root of, and forms a sort
of ' a connecting link for, the
various kinds of relations which
exist between the different words
of a sentence which has to give a
composite sense, yet, if a word
outside a compound is connect-
ed with a word inside a com
pound, especially with a second
50
or further member, the sense
becomes ambiguous; and expect-
ancy in such cases is looked
upon as a fault; e. g. अप्रविष्टविषयो हि
रक्षसाम् Raghu XT. When, however,
in spite of the fault of expectancy
the sense is clear, the compound
is admissible; cf. यदि सावशेषणानां वृत्तिर्न
ऋतस्य वा विशेषणं न प्रयुज्यत इत्युच्यतद्वदत्तस्य
गुरुकुलम् देवदत्तस्य गुरुपुत्रः,अत्र वृत्तिने प्राप्नोति
अगुरुकुलपुत्रादीनामिति वक्तव्यम् I M. Bh.
on P II.1.1 ; cf. also the expression
सपक्षत्वेपि गमकत्वात्समास: often used by
COtmmentator8.
सातामक prescribed in the seventh
chapter or Adhyaya of the Asg-
dhyay: cf.सातामक आर्धधातुकस्येडित पुनरयं
भवति [ M.Bh. om P.VI.4.62, साप्तमिके
पूर्वसर्वर्ण कृते पुनः षाष्ठिको भविष्यति ' M.Bh.
on P.VI.1.70.
स्नाप्य furnished with अाप्य or object;
a transitive root;the term is used in
the Sakatyana, Haimacandra and
Candra grammars; cf. Cndra
I.4.100, Hema. III.3.21, Skag.
IV. 3.55.
साभ्यास together with the reduplica-
tive syllable: cf. उभौ साभ्यासस्य P.
VIII. 4. 21.
साम the case-ending(अाम्) of the geni-
tive plural with the augm(:nt स्
prefixed; cf. साम आक्रम् P.VII. 1.33.
सामतन्त्रव्याकरण an anonymous ancient
work of the type of thePratisakhya
works dealing with the euphonic
changes and accents in the pada-
patha of the Samaveda.
सामन् equalization of tones; cf. वर्णानां
मध्यमवृल्येोचारणम् !
सामथ्यै lit. capacity of a word to
express its sense the word is, how-
ever, used rather technically, as
derived from समर्थ, in the sense of
compositeness; cf. तत्र एकार्थींभाव:
व्यपेक्षां वा सामथ्र्यम् ( MBh.on P.II.1.1.
See समंर्थ above, The word is also

सामवइा
394
सामान्यविशेषभाव
used in the sense of conformity in
sense or connectedness : cf. इसुसी:
सामथ्र्य P.VIII. 3.4l: cf. also उपरीमे:
सामथ्र्य R. T. 105: cf also R. T. 98
and 130.
सामवशा name of a Samdhi or eupho-
nic change of the type of the
vowels अ, इ and उ being lengthen-
ed in some specified cases Chiefly
for the sake of music ( साम ) or
metre. This lengthening is given
the rame ढति in the Rk Prati-
Sakhya: cf. दीर्ध हुरवो ब्यञ्जनन्यस्त्वृकाराद्
यथादिष्टं सामवदाः स सन्धिः | R. Pr.VII.1.
सामवद्प्रातिशाख्य name of a Prti-
Sakhya work on Samaveda. It is
probable that there were some
Pratisakhya works written dealing
with the different branches or
Sakhas of the Samaveda, as could
be inferred from indirect references
to such works. For instance in
the Mahabhasya there is a passage
* ननु च भइछन्देगानां सात्यमुग्रिराणायनीयैः
अर्धमेकारमर्धमेोकारं चाधीयते .पार्षदकृतिरेषां
तत्रभवताम् " which refers to such wor-
ks At present, however, one such
work common to the several
branches of the Samaveda, called
Kktantra is available, and it is
called Samaveda PratiSikhya. It
is believed to have been written
by औदलजि and revised by राकटायन.
सामानाधिकरण्य standing in apposition;
the word is used many times in its
literal sense * having the same
substratum.* For instance, in घटे
करोति देवदत्तः, the personal ending ति
and देवदत्त are said to be समानाधिकरण.
The Samanadhikarana words ag
Put in the same case although, the
5cder and number sometimes
differ. See the word समानाधिकरण.
सामान्य iit. resemblance in any oa..
9r many respects. In the Nirukta
the word is used .in the sense ;
सामान्यग्रहृणावघात
_-------_L
escnblance between the word to
be derived, and any form of , root;
the term refers there to 8ramma-
tical resemblance and may there-
ore nean grammatical c6nsहे
tion ip general; cf. अविद्यमानः सामान्ये-
प्यक्षरवर्णसामान्य त् निर्यात् Nir.II.1.
सामान्यग्रहृण mention of a .., in
such a general way as would
include some varieties or specific
forms of it to which the expres-
sion put is common: e. g. the
word आप् ( fem. affix ) fo् !
afixgs टाप्, डाप् and चाप्: cf. सामान्
प्रहृणार्थे णकार: M.Bh. on P.III. 1.30
cf also ळयुत्सर्गः सामान्यग्रहणार्थः P. II
1.43 Vart. 1.
the preservation
of the inclusion of two or more
terms by such a wording as is
Cornmon to those two or more
terms: e.g. ड for डुप्,डीध् and इन्;
आप् for टाप्, डाप् and चाप्: cf. अॅ
अवृद्दयमत्र सामान्यग्रहणाविघातार्थः ककारनुच्च:
ऋतंत्र्यः | M. Bh. on P. III, 1.88
Wrt.. 7. The phrase सामान्यग्रहृणा-
वित्तार्थ is very frequently usedia
the Kikivrtti.
सामान्यभविष्यत् future tense in gene-
ral the general future tense ex-
Pressed by the verb-endings sub-
stituted for ड्ट्, There is also the
term छद्वभविष्यत् or भविष्यन्ती used in
the sa्9 scnse;. gf. लट् शेषे च शेषे
छे,भाववृते कुले धातोर्ल्युट् प्रत्येया भूतं
Kas. on P. III. 3.13
सामान्यविशेषभच the relationship bet-
ween the general and the particu-
lar, which forms the basis Tof the
type of apavda which is ex-
Plained by the analogy of तक्रक्री-
ण्डिन्यन्याय; the word also refers
to the rnethod followed by the
Stitras of Pinini, or any treatise
of grammar for the matter of
that, where a general rule is

सामान्यविहित 395
सारस्वत
prescribed and, for the sake of
definitemeess some specific rules
laying down exceptions, are given
afterwards: cf. किंचित्सामान्यविंद्घवञ्छक्ष
प्रवत्यै यनापन यत्नेन महृतः इाद्वौघान् प्रति-
पद्यरन् l M. Bh. Ahnik 1.
सामान्यविहेित a general rule, a rule
laid down in general which is
restricted by special rules after-
wards cf. बाधकेननन भवितव्यं सामान्य-
विहितस्य विशेषविहृितन M. Bh. on P. II.
l.24 Wart. 5, cf also M. Bh, on
III.1.94, III. 2.77 etc.
सामान्यातिदेश्ा extended application of |
a thing to others in general; cf.
सामान्यातिदेशे विशेषानतिदेढा: | तेन अनद्यतन-
भूतईप विशेषे विहृितयेङ्कटानं * भूतव्रञ्च ?
(3.3.932) इत्यननातिदूढाः	Pri. Sek.
Pri. ]01.
सामान्यातिदेशापरिभाषा name given to the
Paribh: सामान्यातिदेशे विशेषानतिदेशा:
Pari. Sekh Pari. 101.
सामान्यापेक्ष refering only to a general
thing indicated, and not to any
specific instances. The word is
used in connection with a Ja-
pana or indication drawn from
the wording of a rule, which is
taken to apply in general to kind-
red things and rarely to specific
सामूहिक name given to tad. affixes
prescribed in the sense of collec-
tion ( समूहृ ) by the rule तस्य समूहृ:
and the following ones: P.IV.2.37.
to 61.
सास्य similarity, homogeneity: descri-
bed to be of two kinds- in words
and in sense: cf. किं पुनः शब्दतः साम्य
संख्यातानुदशेा भवत्याहेत्विदर्थत: M. Bh. om
P. I. 3. 10 Vrt 3; cf. also स्थानक्ररण-
कालादिभि: तौल्यम् T. Pr XXIV. 5.
सायण, सायणाचार्य the celebrated Vedic
scholar and grammarian of Vijay-
nagar who flourished in the 14th
century and wrote, .besides the
monumental commentary works
on the Vedas, a grammatical work
on roots and their forms known
by the name माधवीया धातुवृत्ति. As the
colophon of the work shows, the
Dhtuvrtti was written by Sayana-
carya, but published under the
name of Madhava, the brother of
Sayamacarya: cf. इति मह्यमन्त्रिणा मायणसु-
तन माधवसईदरेण सायणाचार्येण विरचितायां
माधवीयायां धातुवृतैौ...Madhaviya Dh∂
tuvrtti at the end: cf also तन
मायणपुत्रेण सायणन मनीषिणा | व्याख्यया माधवो
चय धातुवृत्तिारच्यते | Mad. Dhtuvrtti
at the beginning. _
things; cf. इदं च सामान्यापेक्षं ज्ञापकं सारङ्गकवि name of a grammarian,
भावतिखेपि पूर्वमुत्पतैः	Pari. 5ck. on
the writer of प्रयुक्ताख्यातमञ्जरीसारसंग्रहृ.
Pari. 50, सारप्रदीपिका name of a commentary
सामान्याभेिघान denotation of the gen-
us factor of a word, as contrasted
by Jagannatha on the Sarasvata
grammar,
with द्रव्याभिधान denctation of the | साण्स्लत्वरी name of a grammar work
individual object; cf. तद्यदा द्रव्याभिधाने |
written by Kavicandra.
तदा बहुवचने भविष्यति, यदा सामान्याभिधानं सारसिद्धान्तकौमुदी the same as लघुसिद्धान्त-
तदैकवर्चनं भविष्यति M. Bh. on P. I. 2.
58 Vart. 7.
सामासिक pertaining to a compound;
found inside a compound: cf
मा भूतां यासौ सामाासक्री ' विभाक्तस्तस्याम्,
यासौ सेमासाद्विभक्तिस्तस्यां भविष्यतः | M.Bh.
on P. VII.1.1: cf. also सामासिक्रडकः
अप्राप्त्या etc. Par. Sek on Pari. 56.
कौमुदी. See लघुकौमुदी.
सारस्वत name of a grammar work
which was once very popular on
account of its brevity, believed to
have been written in the stra
form by an ancient grammarian
named Narendra who is said to
have composed 700 stras : under

सारस्वतटीका
396
सार्वविभक्तिक
the inspiration of Saraswati.1The
exposition of these Stºtras by a
reputed grammarian named Anu-
bhitisvaripcarya who possibly
flourished in the thirteenth century
A. D., is known by the name
सारस्वतप्रक्रिया which has remained as
a text book on grammar to the
present day in some parts of
India. This प्राक्रिया is popularly
known as सारस्वतव्याकरणं. The techni-
cal terms in this grammar are the
current popular ones. "
सारस्वतटीका mame in general given
to commentary works on the Saras-
vata Vyakarana out of which those
written by Ramanrayana, Satya-
prabodha, Ksemarhkara, Jagan-
mºtha and Mahidhara are known
to scholars.
सारस्वतपरिभाषा a grammar work of
the Sarasvata school written by
Dayaratna in explanation of the
technical rules giving conventions
and maxims.
सारस्वतप्रक्रिया the popular name
given to the gloss by Anubhti-
svardpicarya on Narendra's gram-
mar rules. See सरस्वत above.
सारस्वतप्रक्रियाटीका see सारस्वतटीकाabove.
सारस्वतभाष्य a critical gloss on the
Sarasvata grammar by a gramma-
rian named Kasintha.
सारस्वतव्याकरण see सारस्वत above.
सारस्वतसार a work giving a short sub-
stance of the Sarasvata Vyakaraha
with a commentary named Mitव्र-
ksar on the same by Harideva.
सारस्वतसिद्धान्तचन्द्रिका a work on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana by a gra-
mmarian named RºmaSrama.
सारस्वताख्यातर्दीपिका a work on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana bySतrasirhha.
सारावली or सारावली-्याकरण an in-
- dependent treatise on grammar
by Naryaa Vandyopadhyaya.
सारासारविवेक name of a commentary
on NageSa's Paribhasendusekhar
written by बालळाख्त्री रानड,the stalwar
grammarian of the nineteenth cen-
tury at Varanas.
साथेक lit. possessed of sense; signifi-
cant, as contrasted with निरर्थकं: cf.
इतर व सार्थक्रा: Rk. Prati. XIII. 9.
सार्वकालिक denoting time, irrespective
of its divisions such as the past,
the present and the future; e. g.
the krt affixes prescribed by rules
before P. III 2.84; cf. अतः सार्वकालिका
विधयेो वेदितब्या: Kas. on P. III. 2. 88.
सार्वधातुक a term used in Phini's gra-
mmar for affixes applied to verbs,
such as the personal endings and
those krtaffixes which are marked
with.the mute letter शु: cf. तिङ्क
शित्सार्वधातुक्रम् P. III. 4. 113. The
term was taken into his grammar
by Panini frorn ancient grammar
works and thence in their gra-
mmars by othergrammariams; cf.
सार्वधातुकमिति पूर्वौचायेप्रासद्धा सेज्ञये निरन्वया,
स्वभावान्नपुंसकलिङ्गामति	Trilok-com. om
Kat. III. 1.34, The term सार्वधातुक
also was used by ancient gra-
mmarians before Paraini; cf. अापिदा-
लारुतुरुस्तुशम्यमः सार्वधातुकासु च्छन्दसेति पठन्ति.
Ka8. om P. VII. 3.95.
सावेनामिक lit. pertaining to pronouns;
the term is used in connection
with rules or operations concern-
ing exclusively the pronouns; cf.
. नान्यत्सार्वनामिक्रम् [ Kat. II. 1.33.
सार्वभौम a grammarian of the eighte-
enth century who wrote a very
brief critical work on compounds
named समसवाद.
सार्वविभक्तिक pertaining to all cases,
i. e. prescribed to convey the sense
of all case affixes; the term is co-
mmonly used by commentators
with reference to the tad. affix
%
_

स्तचक्राज्ञा
_K
397 संद्धकाण्ड
तस् prescribed by the rule प्रतियोगे
पञ्चम्यास्तसि: and the Warttika तसि-
प्रकरणे आद्यादिभ्य उपसेख्यानम् thereon: cf.
P, V. 4.44 and Vrt. 1 .
स्त्रावकाश्ा possessed of scope for its
application as contrasted with
निरवक्राळा; a term used in connection
with a rule which has got its app-
lication to some cases without
conflict with any other rule: cf.
द्वयेर्हि सावकाइयेो: समवस्थितयोर्विप्रतिषेधो
भवति | M. Bh. on P.I.1.3 Vart. 6.
सावण्र्य the quality of being cognate
or allied; see the word सवर्ण above.
साव्यय together with avyaya or ind-
eclinable: cf.अाख्यातं साब्ययं वाक्यम् उचै:
पठति	नीचैः पठति	M. Bh. on P. II.
1. I. Vart 9.
साहृवर्य presence together, mention
together, association; this साहृचर्य
is many times of use in cases of
doubt regarding the meaning of
a word or the choice of a word
in a particular sense: cf. अथवा
साहृचर्यात्ताच्छब्द्यं भविष्यति | M. Bh. on P.
I.1, 70, I 2. 27: cf. सहृवरितीं यथै-
स्तस्य गतिर्भविष्यति साहृचर्यात् ; M. Bh. on
P. I. 2. 51 Vart. 3.
सि ( 1 ) personal ending सिप् of the
sec. pers. sing.; cf. तिप्तस्झिसिप्थस्थ-
. .महृिङ्क P.III.4.78; ( 2 ) Undi affix
क्सि ( सि ) cf. ढाषिकुषि्षिभ्य: क्सि: Un.
III. 155.
सिंहृावलेोकितन्याय the analogy of the
backward look peculiar to a lion,
who, as he advances, does always
look back at the ground covered.
The word is used in grammar )
with reference to a word taken '
back from a rule to the preceding
rule which technically is called '
अपक्रर्षे: cf. वक्ष्यमाणं विभाषाग्रहृणमह्य सिंहृाबलेो-
क्रितन्यायेन संबध्यते Ka8. on P.III.3.49.
सिव् one of the substitutes ( स् ) for
' the general sign मििल of the aorist
tense ( ड्ड् ); cf. बिल डङ्ग | ब्लेः सिच् P.
III.. 43, 44.
सिचपाद् name given by convention
to the seeond pada of the seventh
adhyaya of Paninis Asdhyay as
the pada begins with the stra
. सचि वृद्धेः परस्मैपदेषु. P. VII. 2. 1.
सेत् an affix marked with the mute
letter स्signifying the designation
पद for the preceding base to which
that affix has been added for
examples where such affixes are
noticed, see the words भवदीय:,
ऊर्णयु:, ऋाविय:, पाश्र्वमू: cf सिति च P.
I. 4. 16.
सिद्ध (1) established; the term is used
in the sense ofनित्यor eternal in the
Varttika सिद्धे शब्दार्थसंबन्ध where, as
Patafijali has observed, the word
सिद्ध meaning नित्य has been purpo-
sely put in to mark an auspicious
beginning of the शब्दानुशासनशास्त्र
which commences with that Var-
ttika: cf. माङ्गलिक आचार्यो महृतः शास्त्रौघस्य
मङ्गलार्थे सिद्धशब्दमादितः प्रयुङ्क्ते M.Bh.on
Ahnika 1 } {2) established, proved,
formed; the word is many times
used in this sense in the Maha-
bhasya, as also in the Warttikas
especially when a reply is to be
given to an objection; cf. P.I. 1.3
Vart. 17, 1-1. 4. Vart. 6: I. I. 5,
Vart.5,I.1.9 Vart. 2 etc,
सिद्धकाण्ड the chapter or portion of
Panini's grammar which is valid
to the rules inside that portion, as
also to the rules enumerated after
it. The word is used in connection
with the first seven chapters and a
quarter of the eighth chapter of
Panini's Astadhyayi, as contrasted
with the last three guarters called
त्रिपादी, the rules in which are
not valid to any rule in the prece-
ding portion, called by the name
सपासताध्यायीं or सपादी as also to any
preceding rule in the Tripadit-
Self cf. पूर्वत्रासिद्धम् P, VIII.2.1.

सिद्धनन्द्न्ि
398
सिद्धान्तरत्नाङ्कुर
सिद्धनन्द्न्ि am ancient Jain sage who
is believed to have written an ori-
ginal work on grammar.
सिद्धहेमचन्द्र a title given to his gra-
mmar by Hemacandra hitnself
which subsequently . came to be
called दैमखाब्दानुशासनं or हेमव्याकरण.
For details see हेमचन्द्र.
सिद्धान्त established tenet or principle
or conclusion, in the standard
works of the different Shstras.
सिद्धान्तकौमुर्दा a critical and scholarly
commentary on the Stras of
Panini, in which the several Sitras
are arranged topicwise and fully
explained with examples and
" counter examples. The work is
exhaustive, yet not voluminous,
difficult yet popular, and critical
yet lucid. The work is next in
importance to the Mahabhsya in
the system of P्ini, and its study
prepares the way for understand-
ing the Mahabhasya. It is prescri-
bed for study in the courses of
Vyakarana at every academy and
Pdghasala and is expected to be
committed to memory by students
who want to be thorough scholars of
Vyakarana.By virtue of its metho-
dical treatment it has thrown into
the back-ground all kindred works
and glosses or Vrttis on the Stras
of Panini. It is arranged into two
halves, the first half dealing with
seven topics ( 1 ) संज्ञापरिभाषा, { 2 )
पञ्चसंधि, ( 3 ) धड्लङ्ग, ( 4 ) स्त्रीप्रत्यय,
( 5 ) क्रारक्र, ( 6 ) समास, ( 7 ) तद्वत,
and the latter half dealing with
five topics, ( 1 ) द्गणी, ( 2 ) द्वादश-
प्राक्रया ( 3 ) कृदन्त ( 4 ) वैदिकी and
( 5 ) स्वर. The author भट्टोजीदीक्षित has
himself written a scholarly gloss
on it called प्रौढमनेरमा on which,
his grandson, Hari Dikgita has
written a , learned commentary
named लबुढाब्दरत्न or simple इाब्दरत्न.
The Siddhāntakaumud has go
a large number of commentaries
on it out of which, the commenta-
ries प्रौढमनेरमा, बालमनोरमा, (by वासुदव-
दीक्षित) तत्त्ववेधिनी and लधुइछेदन्दुशेखर
are read by almost every true
scholar of Vyakarana. Besides
these four, there are a dozen or
more commentaries some of
which can be given below with
their names and authors ( I ) सुबेा-
धिनी by जयकृष्णमेनि, ( 2 ) सुबोधिनी by
रामकृष्णभट्ट ( 3 ) वृहृच्छब्देन्दुशेखर by नागेइ,
( 4 ) बालमनेारमा by अनन्तपण्डित, ( 5 )
वैयाकरणसिद्धान्तरहृस्य by नीलकण्ठ, ( 6 )
रत्नार्णब, by कृष्णामश्र ( 7 ) वैयाकरणसिद्धान्त-
रत्नाक्रर by रामकृष्ण, ( 8 ) सरला by तारा-
नाथ,(9) सुमनेरमा by तिरुमछ,(10)सिद्वान्त-
कौमुर्दाब्याख्या by लक्ष्मीनृसिंहृ, (11 )सिद्धान्त-
र्कौमुदीव्याख्या by विश्वेश्वरतीर्थ, (12) रत्नाकर
by शिवरामेन्द्रसरस्वती and (13) प्रकाळा by
तोलापदीक्षित. Although the real name
of the work is वैयाकरणसिद्धान्ततकौमुदी,
as given by the author, still popu-
larly the work is well known by
the name सिद्धान्तकौमुदी. The work
has got two abridged forrms, the
Madhyakaumud and the Laghu-
kaumudi both written by Varada-
rja, jhe pupil of Bhattoj Diksita.
सिद्धान्तकौमुर्दीगृढफक्रिकाप्रकाशा a small
gloss on Bhattoji's Siddhantakau-
mudi, explaining its difficult lines
and passages, written by a
grammarian named इन्द्रदत्तंीपाध्याय
सिद्धान्तकौमुदीवादार्थ an explanatory
work, discussing the difficult Sen-
tences and passages of the Siddha-
ntakaumudi, written by a gra*
mmariara named Rºmakpsna.
सिद्धान्तरत्न a gloss on the Sarasvati-
sutra written by a grammarian
natmed ]imacandra.
सिद्धान्तरत्नाङ्कर name of a commen-
tary on the Katantraparisista by

सिद्धान्तसारस्वत 399
Sivaramacakravartin. |
सुद्
सिद्धान्तसारस्वत an independent work
on grammar believed to have been
written by Devanandin.
सिद्धान्तिन् a term used in connection
with the writer himself of a trea-
tise when he gives a reply to the
obiections. raised by himself or
guoted from others,the termपूर्वपाक्षन्
being used for the objector.
सिद्धि formation of a word: establish-
ment of the correct view after the
removal of the objection; e. g.
संज्ञासिद्वि, कार्यसिाद्व, स्वरासाद्व.
सिप् (1) the personal ending ( सि ) of
the second person singular (मध्यमपुरु-
वैकवचन ) substituted for theaffixलु,
of the ten tenses and moods लट्,लिट्,
बुट् and others; cf. P.III.4.78: (2
Wikarana affix स् added to a root
before the affixes ofळट् or Vedic
Subjunctive.
सिम a technical term used in the
Wajasaneyi-Pratisakhya for the first
eight vowels of the alphabet, viz.
अ, आ, इ, ई, उ, ऊ, ऋ and ऋ: cf.
सिमादितौ स्वराणाम् V. Pr.. I.44.
द् augment सांय्, prefixed to the
personal affixes which are sub-
stituted for the लिङ्क affixes in the
Atmanepada; e.g. पचेत uचैयाताम् cf.
P. III. 4.102.
सरदेव a prominent grammarian of
the Eastern part of India who
lived in the twelfth century A. D. !
He was a very sound scholar of
. Panini's grammar who wrote a
few glosses on prominent works
in the system. His Paribhavrtti
is a masterly independent treatise
among the recognised
on the Paribhasas in which he has
quoted very profusely from the
works of his predecessors, such as
the Ksika, Nysa, Anunysa and
others. The reputed scholar
works ]
Maitreya Raksita is more often
guoted than others.
सुठ (l) case affix ( सु ) of the nomina-
tive singular and ( सु ) of the
locative plural; cf. P. IV. 1.2:
(2) Undi affix सु ( क्सु ) applied
to the roots इष्: e.g, इक्षु: cf. इषः क्सुः
Unadi 437.
सुक् augment सुक् added according
to some grammarians to any
word optionally with असुक्, which
is prescribed in the case of the
words अश्व, वृष, क्षीर and लवण before
the affix क्यच् ( य ) in the sense of
desire. e. g. दधस्यति, मधुस्यति etc.
cf. P. VII. 1 51 Varttika.
सुच् (l) tad. affix स् applied to fद्व,
त्रि, चतुर् and to एक optionally, in
the sense of * repetition of the
activity' e. g. द्विः करोति etc. cf Kas,
on P. V. 4. 18, 19; (2) Unadi
affix स्, see सु above.
सुजनपण्डित a grammarian who wrote
a small treatise on genders named
सुद् (1) short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for the
first five case-affixes which are
called सर्वनामस्थान also, when they
pertain to the masculine or the
feminine gender: cf. सुडनपुंसकस्य
I.1.43; (2).augment स् prefixed to
the root क् and to the root मू when
preceded by certain prepositions
and as seen in the words कुस्तुम्बुरु
and others as also in the words
अपरस्परं गोष्पद, आस्पद, अाश्चय, अपस्कर्,
विभ्किर्, इरिश्रन्द्र, प्रस्कण्a, मल्कर, कास्तीर,
अज्तुन्द, कारस्कर and words in the
class of words headed by पारस्कर,
under certain conditions; cf. P.
WI. 1.135-57: (3) augment स्
prefixed to the case-affix अाम्
after a pronoun; e. g. सर्वेषाम् cf.
P. VII. I.52;(4) augment सु pre-
fixed to the consonant त् or य्
pertaining to लिङ्क affixes, e. g.

सुघाञ्जन
400
सुब्धातु
कृर्षीष्ट cf. P. III. 4.107.
सुघाञ्जन an anonymous commentary
on the Siddhantakaumud of
Bhagoji Dksita.
सुप् (l) locative case affix सु: (2)
short term for case-affixes, as
formed by the syllable सु (the
nom. sing. affix) at the beginning
and the final consonant प्र of सुप्,
the locative plural case-affix in
the rule स्वैौजसमौट्...डयेासुप् P. IV.
1.2. These case afixes are called
* vibhakti * also. These सुप् affixes
are elided after an indeclinable
word: cf. अव्ययादाप्सुप: P. II. 4.82;
in Weda स्, झा ( ए ), या, डां, डया, याच्
and अाल् as seen, are substituted for
these case affixes, which some-
times are even dropped or assimi-
lated with the previous vowel of
the base: e. g. सन्तु पन्थाः, अद्रि वर्मन्
etc. cf, P. WII. 1.39. These case-
affixes are as a rule, grave-accent-
ed (अनुदात्त) excepting in such cases
as are mentioned in P. WI.1. 166
to 184 and 19l.
सुपद्मव्याकरण an independent work
on grammar written by a scholar
of grammar named पद्मनाभ, who
fourished in Mithil in the fif-
teenth century A. D.
टीका a commentary
written by a scholar of grammar
named विष्णुमिश्र on the Supadma-
vyakarana, which see above.
सुपद्यसमाससंग्रहृ a treatise written by
a grammarian named रूपनारायण,
on the सुपद्मद्वयाकरण, which see below.
सुपद्मासमाससंग्रहृटीका a commentary
by a grammarian named विष्णुमिश्र,
on the सुपद्यसमाससंग्रहृ which see
above. _
सुप्सुप्समास a popular name given
to a compound formed of two
nouns, which cannot be ordinarily
explained by the rules of grammar
laid down in definite terms b
Panini in II.1.5I to II. 2.29. The
so called irregular compounds are
explained as formed in accord-
ance with the rule सहृ सुपा II. 1.4
wherein the word पद presents i-
scf by अनुति from सुबामन्त्रिते पराङ्गवत्
स्वरे II. . 2, the rule सहृ सुपा as a
result bging explained as सुप् सुपा
सह समस्यत. As these compounds
cannot be put under the topics
of अव्ययीभाव, तत्पुरुष and others
mentioned by Panini in II. 1.5
to II. 2.29 they are called _
मास or केवलसमास. सुप्सुप्सं
सुबन्त name given to a word formed
with the addition of a case-affix
and hence capable of being used
in a sentence by virtue of its being
called a पद by the rule सुप्तिङन्तं पदम्
The ancient grammarians gave
four kinds of words or padas vi?.
नाम, अाख्यात, उपसर्ग and निपेात which
Panini has brought under two
heads सुबन्त including नाम, उपसर्ग and
निपात and तिडन्त standing for आख्यातः
cf. सुतिडन्ते पदम् P. I. 4. 14.
सुबोधिनी name given to (1) a com-
mentary on the Siddhantakaumudi
by Kshamaunin or Jayakrsha-
maunin; (2) a commentary on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana by Ampta-
bhirat : (3) a commentary on the
Sarasvata Vyakarana by Candra-
kirti.
सुठब्घाठ a root formed from a noun or
a subanta by the addition of any of
the following affixes- क्यच् ( by P.
III. 1.8, 10 and l9), काम्यच् (by
P.III.1.9), क्यङ्क (by P. III.1.1 1, 12
and 14-18), क्यच् (by P.III.1.13),णिङ्क
(by P III.1.20), णिच् (by P.III.1.21
and 25) and यक् (by P.III.1.27)and
also by केिप् or zero affix by P.
III. b.l l Varttika 3. All these
formations ending with the affixes
mentioned above are termed roots

सुमनोरमा
401
_
सद्
by the rule सनाद्यन्ता धातव: (P.III. 1. |
32) and are regularly conjugated )
in all the ten tenses and moods )
with the generalconjugational sign |
राप् added to them in the conjuga- |
tional tenses, and स्य, तास् and others |
in the other tenses and moods,
and have verbal derivatives also |
formed by the addition ofsuitable
krt affixes.
सुमनेरम name of a commentary
written by a Southern gramma-
rian तिरुमछ on Bhattoj!'s Siddhanta-
kaumudi
सूत्र a short pithy assertion laying
down something in a scientific
treatise; aphorism; the word is
sometimes used in a collective
sense in the singular, referring to
the whole collection of Sutras or
rules; cf. व्याकरणस्य सूत्रम् M. Bh. on i
Ahnika I. The term is defined as ]
अाल्पाक्षरमसंदिग्धं सारवद्विश्वतोमुखम् | अस्तेो-
भमनवद्यं च सूत्रं सूत्रविदो विदुः. There are
given generally six kinds of Stras
viz. संज्ञासूत्र, परिभाषासूत्र,विधिसूत्र, नियमसूत्र,
प्रतिषेधसूत्र and अधिकारसूत्र: cf. also संज्ञा
व परिभाषा च विधिर्नियम एव व प्रतिषधेोधि-
क्रूरश्र षडुर्वे सूत्रलक्षणम् | Com. on Kat.
I. 1.2.
सूत्रकार the original writer of the
sitras; e. g. पाणिनि, द्राकटायन, शर्ववर्मन् ,
हृमचन्द्र and others. In Panini's sys-
tem, Panini is called Sitrakara, as
contrasted with Katyayana,who is
called the Warttikakra and Pataj-
ali,who is called the Bhasyakara;cf.
पार्णिनः सूत्रकारस्य M.Bh. on P.II 2.1.1.
स्त्रपाठ the text of Panini's Sitras
handed down by oral tradition
from the preceptor to the pupil.
Although it is said that the actual
text of Panini was modified from
time to time, still it can be said
with certainty that it was fixed at
the time of the Bhasyakara who
has noted a few different readings
51
only. The Sutra text approved by
the Bhasyakra was followed by the
authors of the Ksika excepting in
a few cases. It is customary with
learned Pandits and grammarians
to say that the recital of the Sutras
of Panini was originally a continu-
ous one in the form of a Safhhit3-
text and it was later on, that it
was split up into the different
Sitras, which explains according
to them the variation in the
number ofStras which is due to
the different ways of splitting the
Sपेtrapaha.
स्त्रभेद् (l) splitting up of a gramma-
tical rule ( येोगविभाग ); (2) change
in the wording of a rule cf. स एष
सूत्रभेदन लकारोपदेशाः प्लुत्याद्यर्थ: सन्
प्रत्याख्यायेत तैष महते शस्त्वाहूनुकृष्यते
M. Bh. on Siva Stºtra 2 Vart. 5.
स्त्रशाटकन्याय reference to something
as present, when, in fact, it is yet
to come into existence,on the ana-
logy of the expression अस्य सूत्रस्य
इाटकं वय: cf. भाविनी संज्ञा विज्ञास्यते
सूत्रशाटकवत्	M. Bh. on P. I. 3. 12
Wart. 2.
स्कन् the place of the articulation or
' production of the sound .
स्रष्टिधर name of the famous com-
mentator on Purusottamadeva's
Bhasvrtti,who lived in thefifteenth
century A.D.
स (1) one of the several affixes found
in Veda in the sense ofतुमुन् ( तुम् of
the infinitive); e. g. वृक्षे राय:; cf.
Ph. III. 4.9; (2) personal-ending
substituted for थास् in the pres-,
perfect, and other tenses; cf. यासः
स P. III. 4.80.
सद् together with the augment * ? '
prescribed in general for being
prefixed to an Ardhadhatuka affix
beginning with any consonant
except य्. The word is also used

_ 402 स्रो
सट्क
in the sense ofa root which allows
the augment इट् ( इ ) to be prefixed
to validi Ardhadhtuka affixes
placed after it, in contrast with
such roots which do not allow it
and hence which are termed अनिट्,
सट्क possessed of the augment इट्
See सट्.
सतुसग्रहृ name of a commentary on
Bopadeva's Mugdhabodha Gra-
mmar written by a grammarian
named Gangadhara.
सेन् one of the several affixes found
in Veda in the sense of the infini-
tive affix तुम् ; e.g. एषे रथानां, cf. P.
III.4.9.
सनक name of an ancient grammar-
ian quoted by Panini in the rule
गिरश्र सेनकस्य P. W. 4.112.
सेढ tad. affix सेाद् prescribed in the
sense of " milk ', optionally along
with the affixes दूस and मरीस after
the word अधि; e. g. अचिसोढम् cf.
अवैईग्धे सीढदूलमरीसन: P. IV. 2. 36.
Vart. 5.
सोपसर्ग together with a preposition
( उपसर्ग ) prefixed; the term is used
in connection with a root to
which a preposition such as प्र, परा
etc. has been prefixed; cf. अकर्मका
अपि वै सेर्पसगः सकर्मका भवन्ति M. Bh.
on P. I. 1,44.
_ o _
सेीम, सोमयाये name of the writer of
a gloss named त्रिभाष्यरत्न on the
Taittiriya Prtisakhya.
सोमदेव a Jain Grammarian, the
writer of a gloss on the commen-
tary Jainendra Vyakarana named
इाब्दार्णवेचन्द्रिका by the author, who
was a resident of thc Deccan and
lived in a village named Arjurika
( called आजरं to-day ) near Kolha-
pur in the twelfth century.
_ _ _
सोमयाजेन a modern grammarian of
the mineteenth century who wrote
a short grammatical work as a
hand-book for scholars who as-
pired to be poets. The work was
called वेय:क्रण्ाव्दमाला.
सेीष्मन् accompanied by a rush of
breath. The word is taken to
apply to the second and fourth
consonants which are produced
by the rush of unintonated breath
through the open mouth like
steam through a pipe the second
and fourth class consonants; cf.
युग्माः सोष्माण: R. T. 16.
सौत्र belonging to the stra; found
in the sutra as contrasted with
what is given elsewhere; cf. सौत्रोयं
धातु: or सौत्रं पुरुरवम etc. cf also सौत्री
निर्दढाः M. Bh. on P. III. 2.139,
III. 4.60, 64, IW. 2.64 etc.
सौनाग name of a school of ancient
grammarians who composed Var-
ttikas in explanation of the stras
of Panini; cf. सौनागाः पठन्ति P. III.
2.56 Virt. 1, IV. 1.74 Vart. 1.
cf. एतदेव सौननैर्विस्तरतरकेण पाठतम् M.
Bh. on II. 2.18 Wart. 4.
सूर्यभगवान् an ancient grammarian
quoted in the Mahibhasya: cf.
तत्र सीर्यभगवतेाक्तमनिधिज्ञी वाडवः पठति |
इष्यत एव चतुर्मात्रः त: M. Bh. on
P. VIII. 2.106 Vart. 3.
संवादिक a root of the स्वादिगण or the
Fifth Conjugation.
स्कन्धच् a tad. affix in the sense of
collection, added to the words
नर, करि and तुरङ्ग: cf. Varttika on P.
IV. 2.51 quoted in the Kasik-
vrtti.
स्तु a term used for the sibilant स्
and dental class consonants for
thc substitution of the sibilant ्
and palatal consonants in respec-
tive order cf. स्तोः श्चुना श्चुः P.
VIII. 4.40.
खत्रो (1) the sense of the feminine;
cf. त्रयाम् P. IV. ].3-8l (2) a word

खत्रीप्रत्यय
ending with an affix in the sense
of feminity such as टापू, डाप् or चाप्
or डीप्, डीष् or डीन् or the like; cf.
स्त्रीभ्यो ढक् IV. 1.120 (3) a word
in the sense of feminine cf. स्त्री
पुवच P. I. 2.66.
खत्रीप्रत्यय (1) affixes added to the
masculine base of a word to show
the sense of the feminine, such as
आ in टापृ, डाप् and वाप् and ई in डीपू,
ङ्क्ष् and डेन्. See P. IV. 1.8 %
8l. (2) name of a section of Bha-
ttoj's Siddhantakaumudi which
gives the affixes added for the
formation of a feminine base.
रूथ based upon; the word is pecu-
liarly used in the Pratisºkhya
works in the sense of " based on '
* belonging to ' or * made up of';
cf. अरुथनामेनीं सन्ध्यम्, R. T. 9 , so
also cf. वं नैगि उसेथ R. T. 162.
स्थविरकीाण्डन्य name of aa ancient
writer of Pratisakhya works who
is guoted in the Taittiriya Pra-
tisakhya cf. T. Pr. XVII. 4.
स्थान place of articulation; place of
the production of sound, which
is one of the chief factors in the
production of sound; cf. अनुप्रदानात्
सेसर्गौत् स्थानात् करणविन्ययात् | जायते वर्ण-
वैशेष्यं परीमाणानव पञ्चमात्, T.Pr. XXIII.
2. Generally there are given
five places of the production of
sound viz. कण्ठ, ताळ, मूर्धन् , दन्त and
ओष्ठ, respectively for the articula-
tion of guttural, palatal cerebral,
dental and labial letters and नासिका
as an additional one for the arti-
culation of the nasal consonants
श्र, म्, ङ्क, ग् and न् For the Jihva-
muliya sound (क ), जिंह्वामूल is
given as a specific one. for
details and minor differences of
views, see T. Pr. III, R. Pr. 1.18
to 20,R. T. 2-10; V. Pr. I. 65 to
84 and M. Bh, on P. [. !. 9.
403
स्थानिवद्भव
(2) place, substratum, which is
generally understood as the sense
of the genitive case-affix in rules
which prescribe substitutes; cf. षष्ठी
स्थीनंयागा. P. I. 1. 49.
स्थानषष्ठी one of the several kinds of
the genitive case when it means
a place or substratum, see the
word स्थान.
स्थानिन् the original word or part
of a word such as a syllable or
two of it or a letter of it, for
which a substitute ( अादश्ा ) is
prescribed: cf. स्थानिवदादे्ीSनावधौ
P. 1.]. 56.
स्थानिवत् similar to the original in
behaviour; cf. स्थानिवदादेशोनल्विधे
P. [. 1.59. See स्थानिवद्भाब.
स्थानिवत्त्व acting like the original. See
स्थानिवद्भाव.
स्थानिवद्भाव behaviour of the substi-
tute like the original in respect of
holding the qualitics of the ori-
ginal and causing grammatical
operations by virtue of those
qualities. By means ofस्थानिवद्भाव,the
substitute for a root is,for instance,
looked upon as a root; similarly, a
noun-base or an affix or so, is look-
ed upon like the original and it
can cause such operations or be a
recipient ofsuch operations as are
due to its being a r00t or a noun
or an affix or the like This
स्यानिवद्भाव cannot be, and is not
made also, a universally applicable
feature; and there are limitations
or restrictions put upon .it, the
chief of them being अल्विधौ or in
the matter of such operations as
are caused by the property of be-
ing a single letter' (अल्विधौ). There
are two views regarding this *beha-
viour like the original' : (l) suppo-
sed behaviour which is only instru-
mental in causing operations o

स्थानेद्विर्वचनपक्ष
undergoing them which is called
शास्त्रातिदेदा and (2) actual restoration
to the form of the original under
certain conditions only as prescri-
bed which is called रूपातिदशा. The
रूपातिददा is actually resorted to by
some grammarians in the case of
the reduplication of roots: cf. Ks.
on द्विवेचनचि P.I.1.59 and M.Bh. on
P.I.1.59.See the word रूपातिदढा also.
For details see Vol. VII p.p. 241-
243, Vyākarana Mahabhasya D.E.
Society's Edition.
_K पक्ष one of the two alter-
native views regarding reduplica-
tion according to which two word-
ings or units of the same form
replace the original single word-
ing, cf. स्थानद्विर्वन्वनपक्षे स्थानिवद्भावात्प्रकृति
व्यपदेर्श्ा: Shradeva Pari. 68.The other
kind of reduplication is called द्वि:-
मयेर्भगाद्वर्वचनपक्ष which looks upon re-
duplication as the mere placing of
an exactly similar unit or wording
after the original first unit. This
alternative view is accepted in the
Ksika: cf. Kas. on P. WI.1.1.
स्थानेयोगा a variety of thegenitive case
when it is connected in sense with
the Prtipadika by the relationship
of स्थान or place, as contrasted with
the relationships of the kind ofीवेषय-
विषयेिभब, अवयवावयविभाव and others.
Asgrammar is a Science ofwords,in
those places where one word is me-
ntioned for another by the use of
the genitive case it should be und-
erstood that the word mentioned
is to be substituted for the other:cf
the rule of Panini for that purpose
षष्ठी स्थानेयेोगा explained by Bhagoj
Dksita as अानधीरितसंबन्धविशेषा षष्ठी स्था-
नयेगा बोध्या; cf. S.K. on P.I.1.49. In
some grammars the sthanin and
adesa are expressed in the same
case, wiz. the nominative case.
स्थान्यादेशाभाव the relation between
404 स्पर्श
the original and the substitute
which is described as of two kinds
(!) supposed and actual; cf.अानुमा-
निकस्थान्यादेशभावकल्पनेपि श्रोतस्थान्यदशभा-
व्रस्य न त्याग: Pari.Sek. Pari.
स्थापितव्य to be cstablished, to be
brought about.
स्थित (1) happened, come to pass;
e. g. राम डस् इति स्थित etc.: (2) esta-
blished ; remaining intact after the
removal of doubts; cf. ए हिं
स्थितमेतत् (3) remaining umaffected
as referring to अस्पृष्टकरण;cf स्वराणामनु-
स्वारस्य ऊष्मणां च अस्पृष्टं करणं वदितव्यम् तच
स्थितामत्युच्यते यत्र वर्णस्थानमाश्रित्य जिह्वावतिष्ठते
तत् स्थितमित्युच्यते Uvvata on R.Pr.
XIII.* ; (!) established or stated in
the Padapatha: cf. स्थित पदे पदपाठ
इत्यथैः gloss on T. Pr. XX.2.
स्थिति utterance of a pada or padas
in the Padapatha without इति; the
utterance with इति being called
उपाथिति: cf. पदं यदा केचलमाहृ सा स्थितिः
R. Pr. XI.15; (2) established prac-
tice or view: cf. इाकल्यस्य स्थविरलैयतरा
थति:	R. Pr. II. 44.
ख्न tad. affix रुन added optionally
with स,to the word मृद् in the sense
of praiseworthy; c. g. मृत्स्न also
मृत्सा: cf. सस्ने प्रशंसायाम्	P.V.4.40.
रुन् tad.affix स्न,added in many tadd-
hita senses, अपत्य, जात,समूहृ, अागत and
others mentioned upto P. V. Ist
pda end; e. g. सूत्रेण: पींस्न:, cf. खत्री-
पुंसाभ्यां नञ्स्नञ्जो भवनात् P.IV.1.87.
स्पर्ध a word used in the sense of "a
conflict of two rules' ( विप्रातषेध )
in some grammars such as those
of Jainendra, Skatyana and
Hemacandra; cf Jain. I.2.39,Sak.
I.1.46 and Hema. WII.4. l l9.
स्पर्श a contact consonant: a term
used in connection with the cons0-
nants of the five classes, verily
because the karana or the tip of
the tongue touches the place of

utterance in the mouth in their
pronunciation; cf. क्रादये मावसानाः
स्पर्शः S.K. Sarhjhprakarana on
P. VIII. 2.1; cf. also अाद्या: रुप्:
पञ्च ते पञ्चवर्गः R.Pr. I.78: cf. also
T.Pr.I.7.
स्पष्टाथे an expression used often by
commentators with reference to a
line or a passage of the text the
meaning of which is clear and no
explanation is necessary.
किट name ofome of the four inter-
nal efforts when the instrument
( करण) of articulation fully touches
' the sthana or the place of the
405
्ाटन
advocated beforePanini. The word
रूपेटायनhas been put by Panini in the
rule अवङ् स्फोटायनस्य only inciden-
tally and, in fact, nothing can be
definitely deduced from it although
Haradatta says that स्फोटायन was
the originator of the रफाटवाद. The
word स्फीट is not actually found in
the Prtikhya works. However,
commentators on the Pratisakhya
works have introduced it in their
explanations of the texts which
describe वणेत्पात or production of
sound; cf. com. on R.Pr.XIII.4,
T.Pr. II.1. Grammarians have
given various kinds of sphota: cf.
production ofsound in the mouth.
See the word स्पई above: तत्र स्पृष्टं|
प्रयतनं स्पर्शनम् S.K. on P. VI1I.2.1 ;
cf. also M.Bh. on P.I.1.9.
स्फ a short technical term used in
the.jainendra Vyakarana instead
of the सेयेाग in Panini's grammar.
स्फोट name given to the radicalSabda
which communicates the meaning
to the hearers as different from ध्वनि
or the sound in ordinary experien-
ce.The Vaiyakaranas,who followed
Panini and who were headed by
Bhartghari entered into discussions
regarding the philosophy of Gra-
mmar, and introduced by way of
deduction from Panini's grammar,
an important theory that श>
which communicates the meaning
is different from the sound which
is produced and heard and which
is merely instrumental in the mani-
festation of an internal voice
" which is called Sphota.रूकुटयतंनन अथै:
इति स्फुटः or रफीट: शब्दो ध्वानस्तस्य व्यायमा-
दुपजायत Vakyapadya; cf also अभि-
यक्तबादक्रो मध्यमावस्थ आन्तरू: इाब्द: Kai-
yata's Pradipa. For, details see
Vakyapadiya I and Sabdakaustu-
bha Ahnika 1. It is doubtful
{ whether this Sphota theory was.
स्फोटो द्विधा | क्याक्तपेटा जातिस्फोटश्च ब्यक्-ि
स्किटः सखण्ड अखण्डश्च ) सखण्ड ， बर्णपदवाक्य-
भदन त्रिधा , अखण्ड: पदवाक्यभेदन द्विधा !
एवं पञ्च ब्याक्षतर्फाटाः | जातिस्फोट: वणे-
पदवाक्यभेदेन त्रिधा ， इयवमष्टौ स्फीट:' तत्र
अखण्डवाक्यर्फाट एव मुख्य इति न्या: l वाक्य
जातिस्फोट इति तु प्राञ्चः |; cf. also
पदप्रकृतिः संहिता इति प्रातिशाख्यमत्र मानम् !
पदानां प्रकृतिरिति षष्ठीतत्पुरुषे अखण्डवाक्यस्फी-
टपक्षः । बहुत्रांईौ सखण्डबाक्यसेाट:|
स्फीटचटक a small treatise on the
theory of Sphota by a sound
modern scholar ofWyakarana and
Nyaya, by name Kshasāstri Arade
who lived in Benaras in the earlier
part of the nineteenth century.
स्फीटवन्द्रिका a small treatise on the
theory of Sphota written by Jaya-
kpsna Maun of the famous Maunin
family. The author is known as
Krsnabhatta also.
स्फोटतत्त्वानिरूपण a work on the
Sphota theory by the famous
grammarian Krslasesa of the Sesa
family of grammarians.
स्फोटन (1) manifestation of the sense
of a word by the external sound
or dhvani; the same as sphota;
(2) separate or distinct pronuncia-
| tion of a consonant in a way by

स्फीटानरूपण
breaking it from the cor.junct con- |
sonants; cf. स्फोटनं नाम पिण्डीभूतस्य
संयोगस्य पृथगुचारणम् रु दार्षो वा न वा | V.
Pr.IV.165.
स्फोटनिरूपण name of a work discuss-
ing the nature of Sphoga written
by Apadeva.
स्फोटवाद् a general name given to
treatises discussing the nature of
Sphota written by the Vaiyaka-
ranas who defend and establish
the theory of Sphota and by the
Naiyayikas who criticise the theory.
Famous among these works are
(l) स्फोटवाद by a stalwart Gramma-
rian Kondabhatta, the author of
the Waiyakaramabhisama and (2)
संटिवाद by NageSa, the reputed
grammarian of the eighteenth
century.
स्फोटसिद्धान्त the doctrime of Sphota,
as advocated by the grammarians
and criticised by others. See the
word स्फोट,
स्फीटसाद्ध (1) name of a short
treatise on the nature of Sphota,
written by a grammarian named
Bharata MiSra; (2) name of a
short disquisition on Sphoga by
MandanamiSra.
स्फोटायन an ancient grammarian
' referred to by Panini in the rule
अवङ् स्फोटायनस्य P.VI.1.123, Great
grammarians like Haradatta
observe that this फोटायन was the
first advocate of the Sphota theory
and hence he was nicknamed
स्फोटायन: cfः स्फोटः अयनं परायणं यस्य स
स्फोटायन: स्|्टप्रतिपादनपरो वेयाकरणाचार्यः |
Padamajjar on P. VI.1.123.
रमाव case-ending स्मात् substituted
for the ablative sing. case-affix डसि
placed after pronouns; cf. डसडयो:
रुमात्स्मिनौ P. VII. 1. 15, 16.
स्वति an authoritative dictum of an
ancient grammarian before the
स्वतस्त्र
famous author of the Vrttikas:cf.
तथा च स्मृतिः व्रतपा इापानुबन्धेन निंदिं
& etc, Siradeva Pari. 68.
स्मै case ending मै, substituted for
the dative sing.. case-affix ड after
pronouns; cf. सर्मनाम्न स्मैP. VII.1.14.
स्य (1) case-ending रय substituted for
the genitive singular case-affix after
bases ending in अ: cf. टाड्सडसाम-
नात्स्याः P. VII.1.12: (2) Vikarana
affix स्य placed before the personal
endings of ट् and वृङ्क (the second
future tense and the conditional
mood); cf स्यतासी लुछटो: P. III.1.33.
स्याद् augment स्या affixed to a case-
affix marked with the mute ङ्क i.e.
ड, डसि, डस् and ड of the dat. abl.
gen. and loc. singular after a
pronoun and optionally after
तृतीय and द्वितीय ending with the
fem. affix अा: cf. सर्वज्ञेये सर्वस्याः सर्वस्याम्
द्वितीयस्यै, द्वितीयाय, तृतीयस्यै, तृतीयाय: cf.
P. VII. 3.1 14, 1 ] 5.
स्यादि the Wikaranas headed by the
Wikarana स्य mentioned in P.III.1.
33 upto III.1.90.
स्व (1) personal-ending of the second
person sing. Atmanepada in the
imperative mood; cf थास: से | सवाभ्यां
वामौ | P.III.4.80, 91 ; (2) a term
used in the sense of स्त्रवर्गांय (belon-
ging to the same class or category)
in the Pratisikhya works; cf स्पर्श:
सेवे R.T.25; cf. also क्रान्त् सेवे R. T. 1.
55;cfalso R, Pr.IV.1 ; andVI.1 ;(3)
cognate, the same as सवर्ण defined
by Painini in तुल्यास्यप्रयत्नं सवर्णम् P.
P.I.1.9; the term is found used in
theJain grammar works ofJaine-
ndra, Skatayana and Hemacanda
cf ]ain. I.1.2 Sik- I. 1.2; Hema.
I.i. 17.
स्वतन्त्र lit. independent independ-
ent in activity: the subject or
agent of an action ( कर्ता ) is defin-
ed as स्वतन्त्र independent in his

स्वतन्त्रपदंीपास्थातपक्ष 407
स्वर्गे
_ |
activity, i. e. not depending upon |
any one for the same; cf. स्वतन्त्र:
कत P. I. 4. 54.
स्वतन्त्रपदोपास्थतिपक्ष an alternative
view regarding the explanation of
the rule * इको गुणवृद्धी * P. I. 1. 3 by
taking an additional word गुणवृद्धी
supplied in the,sitra. For full ex-
planation see Sabdakaustubha on
P. I. 1. 3.
स्वपदार्थ meaning of one's own, as
possessed by a word. In many
compounds especially in the Bahu-
vrhi compounds the meaning
expressed by the compound word
* is quite different from the one
expressed by the constituent words;
cf. स्वपदार्थे कर्मधारयः | अन्यपदार्थे बहुव्रीहिः |
M. Bh. on P. II. 1. 69.
स्वपाठ the original recital of theVeda:
the Sarmhitapatha as opposed to
the Padapatha which is looked
upon more or less as artificial.
स्वर (l) vowel, as contrasted with a
consonant which never stands by
itself independently. The word स्वर
is defined generally :as स्वयं राजनेत त
रुवरा: ( M. Bh. on pn. The word
स्वर is always used in the sense of a
vowel in the Pratisakhya works;
Panini however has got the word
अच् (short term or Pratyaharaform-
ed ofअ in *अइउण्' and च् at the end
of एऔच् Mahesvarastra 4 ) al-
ways used for vowels, the term स्वर
being relegated by him to denote
accents which are also terned स्वर
in the ancient Pratisakhyas and
grammars. The number of vowels,
although shown differently in dif-
erent ancient works, is the same,
wiz. five simple vowels अ,इ,उ, ऋ, ल,
and four diphthongs ए, ए, ओ, and
अौ. These mine, by the addition
of the long varieties of the first
four such as आ, ई, ऊ, and ऋ, are |
____________
increased to thirteen and further
to twentytwo by adding the
pluta forms, there being no long
variety for ल and short onहं
for the diphthongs. All these
twentytwo varieties have further
subdivisions, made on the crite-
rion of each of them being further
characterized by the properties
उद्, अनुदIत and रूचरित and
निरनुनासिक and सानुनासेक. (2) The
word स्वर also means accent, a
property possessed exclusively by
vowels and not by consonants, as
they are entirely dependent on
vowels and can at the most be
said to possess the same accent
as the vowel with which they are
uttered together. The accents
are mentioned to be three; the
acute ( उदात्त ), the grave अनुदात्त
and the circumflex (स्वरित) defined
respectively as उचैरुदात्त:, नीचैरनुदात्तः
and समाहृार: स्वरितः by Panini (P. I.
2.29, 30,3l). The point whether
समाहृार means a combination or
coming together one after another
of the two, or a commixture or
blending of the two is critically
discussed in the Mahabhasya.
(vide M. Bh. on P. I. 2.31). There
are however two kinds ofsvarita
mentioned by Panini and found
actually in use : (a) the indepen-
dent स्वरित as possessed by the
word स्वर् (from which possibly
the word स्वरित was formed) and
a few other words as also many
times by the resultant vowel out
of two vowels ( उदात्त and अनुदात्त )
combined, and (b) the enclitic
or secondary svarita by which
mame, one or more grave vowels
occurring after the udatta, in a
chain, are called cf P, WIII. 2.4
WIII. 2.6 and VIII 4.66 and 67.
The topic of accents is fully

स्वरप्रतिरूपक
discussed by the authors of the
Pratisakhyas as also by Panini.
For details, see R. Pr. III. 1.19;
T.Pr. 38-47 V. Pr. [. 108 to 132,
II. I.65 A. Pr. Adhyaya l pdas
1, 2, 3 and Rk. Tantra 51-66;
see also Kaiyata on P. I. 2.29;
(3) The word स्वर is used also in
the sense of a musical tone. This
meaning arose out of the second
meaning * accent ' which itself
arose from the first viz. *vowel',
and it is fully discussed in works
explanatory of the chanting of
Samas. Patanjali has given Seven
subdivisions of accents which may
be at the origin of the seven
musical notes. See स:तरुवर above.
स्वरप्रतिरूपक a word or Pratipadika
which is exactly similar to a
single vowel such as उ or अा or .
ए and the like; such words are
to be looked upon as Avyayas
and the case-affixes after them
are dropped when they are used.
cf. स्वरप्रतिरूपकमव्ययम्.
स्वरभक्ति a vowel part: appearance
of a consonant as a vowel the
character of a vowel borne by a
consonant. Many times a semi-
vowel which consists of one letter
has to be divided especially for
purposes of metre, as also for
accentuation into two letters or
rather, has to be turned into two
letters by inserting a vowel before
it or after it, for instance य् is to
be turned into इय् e. g, in त्रियम्बकं
यजामहे, while र् or रेफ is to be turned
into र्क् as for instance in कर्हि चित्
which is to be uttered as क्रर् ऋ हृि
चित्. This prefixing or suffixing
ofa vowel is called स्वरभक्:ि cf.
रवरभारीतः पूर्वभागक्षराङ्क द्राघीयसी सार्धमंत्रतर
च | अधेनान्येा ( R. Pr. I. 32.85: cf.
also न सेयेंगे स्वरभाक्तर्विहृान्त R. Pr.
WI. 35; cf. also रेफात् खरेपहिताद् व्यञ्ज-
408
स्वरसर्वनाम
नेदयाद् ऋक्रूरवर्णा स्वरभक्तिरुत्तरा: R. Pr.
VI. 46. In Paini's grammar,
however, the word अज्भाक्त, which
means the same is used for स्वरभक्:ि
cf ऋति ऋ वा लति ल वा इत्युभयत्रा
विंधये . वर्णद्वयं द्विमात्रम् | अाद्यस्यम् ;
रेफौ तयेरिकं मात्रा , अभितेाज्भतेरपरा ,S
K. on VI. 1.101.
स्वरभिन्न differing in the matter of
accent: words so differing are
Practically looked upon as one and
the same cf. स्वरभिन्नानां यस्योत्तरस्बराबाध-
रूत्येकशेषो वक्यब्यः | अक्षश्च अक्षश्च अक्षी ,
M. Bh' on I. 2. 64 Vart. 24, Fo
technical purposes, they are some-
times looked upon as different, cf.
स्वरभिन्नस्य च प्राप्नुवन् विधिरनित्यः	Par.
Sek. Pari. 49.
स्वरोभद् difference in accents. See
स्वराभेल above.
स्वरविाचे a rule prescribing an accent
or a modification of accent.
स्वरविराम a pause between two
vowels in one and the same word
as in तितउ or पउग or in two differ-
ent words ccming close by the
visarga or य् between the two being
elided, as for instance in द्वा इहृ.
स्वरविव्रत ( 1 ) the same as स्वरविराम
which see above; ( 2 ) a short trea-
tise on Vedic accents written by a
modern Vedic scholar and gramm-
rian named Indradattopidhyaya.
स्वरसंघ euphonic combination of
two vowels, a detailed description
of which . forms a small topic
in the Prtis'khya and grammar
works; wide R. Pr. chapters II.
1-26; T Pr. chapters 9 and 10
V. Pr. III and अस्सा्धप्रकरणम् in
the Siddhintakaumudi.
स्वरसर्वनाम a common accent; the
accent which is supposed to be .
present in a word when none of
the three accents are definite. cf.
एकश्रुतिः स्वरसर्वनाम यथा नपुसकं लिङ्गसर्वनाम

स्वरसाहंतेचारण
M. Bh. on P. VI. 4.174.
स्वरसहितेीचारण recital of the veda
Safmhit text with intonation or
accents, as contrasted with एकश्रुत्यु-
न्वारण which is specially prescribed
in a few cases; tonal
showing distinction between
words of different senses although
pronounced alike, in the Sarhhit
text. e.g. नतेन and न तन.
स्वरार्थ for purposes ofaccent, meant
for accent: cf. अवश्यं वैषा परिभाषा
( असिद्धं बहिरङ्गमन्तरङ्ग ) आश्रयितव्या स्वरार्थम्
M. Bh. on P. I. 1.57.
स्वरित the circumflex accent, the
accent between the acute (.उदात्त)
and the grave ( अनुदात्त); for details
see स्वर.
स्वरितकरण marking or characterizing
by.a svarita accent, as is supposed
to have been done by Panini when
he wrote down his sitras of
grammar as also the Dhtupatha,
the Ganapatha and other sub-
sidiary appendixes. Although the
rules of the Asdhyay are not
recited at present with the pro-
per accents possessed by the
various vowels as given by the
Sutrakra, still, by convention
and traditional explanation, cer-
tain words are to be believed as|
possessed of certain accents, In
the Dhatupatha, by oral tradition
the accents of the several roots are
known by the phrases अथ स्वरितेत:,
अथाद्युदाता:, अथान्तेादात्ताः, अथानुदातत: put
therein at different places. In the
sitras, a major purpose is served
by the circumflex accent with
which such words, as are to conti-
nue to the next or next few or next
many rules, have been marked. As
the oral tradition, according to
which the Sutras are recited at
409
system )
present, has preserevd no acc-
52
स्वरूपप्रहृणा
ents, it is only the authoritative
word, described as 'pratijn' of
the ancient grammarians, which
now is available for knowing the
svarita. The same holds good
in the case of nasalization
( अानुनासिक्य ) which is used as a
factor for determining the indicat-
ory nature of vowels as stated
by the rule उपदेशेजनुनासेक इत्: cf.
प्रतिज्ञानुनासिक्याः पाणिनीया: S. K. on P.
I.3.2.
स्वरितप्रतिज्ञा the conventionaldictum
that a particular rule or part ofa
rule, is marked with the accent
रूवरित which enables the gramma-
rians to decide that that rule or
that part of a rule is to occur
in each of the subsequent Sitras,
the limit of continuation benig
ascertained from convention. It is
possible that Panini in his original
recital of the Asgadhyay recited
the words in the rules with the
necessary accents probably he
recited every word, which was not
to proceed further, with one acute
or with one circumflex vowel,
while, the words which were to
proceed to the next rule or rules,
were marked with an actual cir-
cumflex accent ( स्वरित ), or with
a neutralization of the acute and
the grave accents (स्त्ररितत्व), that is,
probably without accents or by
एकश्रुति or by प्रचय; cf स्वरितेनाधिकार:
P. I.3.II and the Mahabhasya
thereon.
स्वरितेत्marked withamutecircumflex
vowel; the term is used in conne-
ction with roots in the Dhatupagha
which are said to have been so
marked for the purpose of indicat-
ing that they are to take personal
endings of both the padas; cf.
स्वरितञ्जित: क्रत्रभिप्राये क्रियाफले P. I.3.72.
स्वरूपप्रहृण mention by the verbalform,

स्वरूपयोग्यता
410
स्वार्थ
I
and not by the description of |
' characteristics; e. g. मृजेर्वृद्धिः P |
VII. 2.114; सृजिदृशेIइल्यमाक्रति VI. l . }
58, cf.धातोः स्वरूपग्रहणे तत्प्रत्यये कार्यविज्ञानम्
M.Bh. o:n P.VI.1.58.
स्वरूपयोग्यता deserving by virtue of
ome's own form.
स्वरूपविधि an operation prescribed
for the verbal form of the word
and not for such words as possess
the meaning of the word; .cf अख्त
कश्चित्पुरुषारम्भः क: | स्वरूपविधिनृणाम | हृन्ते-
रात्मनपंदमुच्यमाने हृनेतरेव स्याद्वधेर्न स्यात् |
M.Bh. on P.I.1.56 Virt. 1. In gra-
mmar there is a general dictum
that in connection with words of
a Sutra, unless they are technical
terms, the word-forms are to be
understood, and not those shown
by the sense of the word: cf. स्वं रूपं
इाब्दस्याशब्दसंज्ञा P. I.1.68. This rule
has some exceptions; for example
in the rule नदीभिश्र P.II.1.20 the
various riwers are to be understood
and not the word नदी.
स्वस्थ lit. remaining in its own fortn
without admitting any cuphonic
change for thc final letter; an an-
cient term for "pragrhya* of Panini.
स्वस्वामिसेघन्घ relationship of the
possessor and the possessed; one
of the general meanings of the
type of relation, expressed by the
genitive case;cfअधिरीश्वरे ' ईश्वरः स्वामी
सच स्वमपेक्षते तदर्थं स्वस्वामिसंबन्धः क्रमेप्रवचन-
असंज्ञी भवति | Kas. on P. I.4.97.
त्वङ्गि (l) one's own limb, as contrast-
ed with that of another person : cf.
स्वाङ्गकर्मकाच्वति वक्तव्यम् | स्वा चहृ न् पार्-
भाषिकं गृह्यते | किं तर्हि स्वमङ्गं स्वाङ्गम् | Ka:,
on FI. 3.28; (2) forming a part,
a portion; cf. स्वाङ्गाच्चेोपसर्जनादसंयोगे-
पधृत् | किं स्वाङ्ग नाम " अद्रवं मूर्तिमत्स्वा
प्राणिस्थमविकारजम् | अतत्स्थं तत्र दृष्ट चे
तत्थ चत्तत्तथा_युतम् | अप्राणनीपि स्वाङ्गम् )
___
स्वातन्त्र्य independence, or autonomy
as a characteristic of the agent
( कत ): cf. कर्मकर्तरि कर्तृत्वमाप्त | कुतः
स्वातन्त्र्यस्य विवाक्षतस्त्रात् | स्वातन्त्रयेणैवात्र कर्ता
विवक्षितः | M.Bh. on P. III. 1. 87
Wrt.5.
स्वादि the affixes headed by सु: a
general term for case-affixes; cf.
स्वौजसर्मीट्ट्रास्टाभ्यां ... डयेासुप् P. IV.1.2.
स्वद्युत्पत्ति the addition of case-affixes
which requircs the designation
प्रातिपदिक for the preceding base by
the rule अर्थवदधातुरप्रत्ययः प्रतिपादकम्
or' कृत्तद्धितसमासाश्र ' P.I. 2.45,46. The
addition of a case-affix entitles
the.word,made up of the base and
the case-affix,to be termed a Pada
which is fit for use in language;cf.
अपदं न प्रयुञ्जीत; cf. निपातस्य अनर्थकस्य
प्रातिपदिकसंज्ञा बक्त्या , किं पुनरत्र पदसेज्ञया
प्राथ्र्यते | प्रातिपदिकादिति स्वाद्युत्पति:, सुवन्तं
पदमिति पदसंज्ञा, पदस्य पदादिति निघातो यथा
स्यात्	M. Bh. om P.I.2.45 Virt.12.
स्वाभाविक natural, unartificial; the
word is used frequcntly in conne-
ction with the capacity of denota-
tion which words naturally possess;
cf. आभधानं पुनः स्वाभाथिकम् P. I. 2.64
Vrt. 36.
स्वाभाव्य inhcrcncc; natural capacity;
the word is used many times in
connection with the power of
denotation: cf. इत़िदशाक्तस्वाभाव्यात् |
Nyāsa on P. III.1. 112 or अभिधान-
इाक्तस्वाभाव्यात् Nysa on P. IV. 4.60.
स्वार a tcrm used in the PratiSikhya
works for स्वरित or the circumflex
accent: स्वा: स्वरितः ( Com. on T.Pr.
XVII.6: cf. also T.Pr.xx.20;
XXIII.24. There are seven varie-
tics of स्वार given in thc Pritisakhya
works, vi2.क्षप्र, नित्य, प्रातदृत,etभनिहृत,
प्रश्लिष्ट, पादवृत and तैरोव्यञ्जन, cf T. Pr.
XX.1-7.
*
स्वाथे ones own sense possessed by a
M.Bhu on P. IV.1.54.
word, such as जाति, गुण, क्रिया or संह

स्वार्थिक
411
हरदत्त
which is called प्रवृत्तिनिमित्त in the
case of nouns, and क्रिया in the case
of verbs; cf also आनर्दिष्टार्थः प्रत्ययाः
स्वार्थ भवान्त M. Bh. on P. III. 2. 4
Vrt. 2.
स्वार्थिक prescribed (after a base) in
the sense of itself; i.c. in the seuse
of the base. The word is used in
connection with a large number of
tad. affixes which are prescribed
without any special sense at-
tached to them; vide P. V.3.36 to
P. W. 4.67. The Samव्रsanta affixes
prescribed from P.V.4.68 onwards
can also be called स्वार्थिकःcf.स्वार्थिकाश्च
प्रकृतिते लिङ्गवचनान्यनुवर्तन्ते | M.Bh. on P.
V. 4. 14, 27. See the word स्वार्थ.
स्वाश्रय possessed as its own, as
contrasted with artificial or inten-
tionally stated ( आनुदेशिक );cf. अस्त्वत्र
आनुदेशिकस्य वलादित्वस्य प्रतिषेधः ， स्वाश्रयमत्र
बलादित्वं भाष्यति M. Bh. on P. I. 1.
59 Vart. 6.
इ
दृ the last of the spirant consonants, |
which is a glottal, voiced letter
called also ऊष्म or spirant of a part-
ial contact, i. e. possessed of the
properties कण्ठय, नादानुप्रदान, ऊष्म and
ईषत्स्पृष्टत्व. Thisletter has been given
twice in the Paninian alphabet,
viz. the Mahesvara Sitras, and
the Bhasyakara has given the pur-
pose of it, viz. the technical
utility of being included among soft
consonantsalong with semi-vowels,
nasals and the fifth, the fourth,
and the third class-consonants
(हृतां अग्etc.),as also among the hard
consonants along with the fourth
and the third class-letters and spi-
rants ( इसळ, ). The second letter
द् in इट् appears, however, to have
only atechnical utility,as the pur- -
pose ofits place there among spir-
. ants is served by the jihvamuliya
and the Upadhmaniya letters
which arc,in fact,thc velar and the
labial spirants respectively, besides
the other three , and स्र.The Rk
Pratisakhya calls ， as a chest sound.
For details, see Mahabhasya on
the Siva Stºtra हृयवरट् Varttikas 1, 2
and 3.
ढ (!) representation of the conso-
nant हृ with अ added for facility of
pronunciation; (2) a technical
term for the internal effort betwecn
विवृत and संवृत, which causes घोष in
the consonants; cf. संवृतविवृतयेोमेध्ये
Lमध्यमप्रक्रांर यः शब्दः क्रियत स हुर्कारसंज्ञो भवति
संज्ञायाः प्रयेाजनं * हृकारो हृचतुर्थेषु ' इति ( तै.
" प्रा.3 %)	Tribhasyaratna on T.Pr.
II.6; ' (3) name of an external
effort causing घोष: cf. सांप्रतिके प्रकृतिस्थे
कण्ठ सति हृकारो नाम बाह्यः प्रयत्नः क्रियते | तेन
च ब्यञ्जनषु घोषे जायते | Vaidikabharatna
on T*Pr. II.6; (4) name of a kind
of external effort of the type of
अनुप्रदान found in the utterance of
the consonant ( द् ) and the fourth
class-consonants; cf. हृकारो हृचतुर्थेषु
T.Pr.II.9.
ईस्रपदा name given to a kind of
svarabhakti,when the consonant. ?,
followed by , is read as र + ष्+ .
इकार See हृ as also हृ.
इनु inside of the chin, mentioned as
a स्थान or place which is touched
by the tongue when a pcculiar
sound described as something like
किट्-किट् is produced; cf क्रिट्क्रडाकरो
इन्बां तिष्ठति R.T.10.
हृरदत्त name of a reputed gramma-
rian of Southern India who wrote
a very learned and scholarly com- .
mentary, named पदमञ्जरी, on the
Kasikavrtti which isheld bygramm-
arians as the standard vgtti or gloss
on the Suitras of Panini,and studied

इRि
especially in theschoolsof thesout-
hern grammarians. Haradatta was
a Drvida Brahmana, residing in a
village on the Bank of Kaveri. His
scholarship in Grammar was very
sound and he is believed to have
commented on many grammar-
works.The only fault of the scholar
was a very keen sense of egotism
which is found in his work, altho-
ugh it can certainly be said that
the egotism was not ill-placed
and could be justified: cf. एवं
प्रकटितेस्माभिभाष्ये परिवेय: पर: तस्य नि:्षतेो
मन्ये प्रतिपत्तापि दुर्लभ: | also प्रक्रियातर्कग्हृन
प्रविष्टो हृष्टमानसः इरदत्तहृर: वैरं विहरन् !
केन वार्यते | Padamajjari, on P. I-1-
3, 4. The credit of popularising
Panini's system of grammar in
Southern India goes to Haradatta
to a considerable extent.
इत़िरे a short form used for भतृहुरि, the
stalwartgrammarian Bhartrhari,by
later grammarians and comme-
ntators in their references to him.
See the word भतृहरि above.
इरिकृष्ण a scholar of grammar who
wrote a short treatise on the
nature and function of prepositions
named उपसर्गवाद.
हरिर्णो name of a kind ofsvarabhakti
when r ( ट् ) followed by s ( बु )
and s ( स् ) is read as र + इ +् and
र + इ +स्र respectively.
इरितादि a class of words headed by
the word इरित to which the taddhita
affix फक् ( अायन ) is added in the
sense of a descendant after the
affix अ ( अञ्ज) has already been
added to them by P. IV. 1. 104,
the word so formed possessing the
sense of the great grandchild
(युवापत्य) of the individuals denoted
इरित भू: others; e. g. हृरितायन:;
cf. इहु तु गोत्राधिकारेपि सामथ्र्याद् यूनि प्रत्यर्थी
भिघीयते K. on P, IV.
412 इररम
हरिदत्त a grammarian who wrote a
commentary on the Undi Stras,
called उणादिसूत्रटका.
दृरेिदीक्षित a reputed grammarian of
the Siddhantakaumudi school of
Panini who lived in the end of the
seventeenth century. He was the
grandson of Bhattoji Diksita and
the preceptor ofNagesabhtta. His
commentary named लधुराब्दरत्न, but
popularly called शब्दरत्न on Bhattoj
Diksita's Praudhamanoram,' s
widely studied by pupils along
with the Praudhamanorama in the
Wyakaranapathasalas. There is a
work existing in a manuscript
form but recentlv taken for print-
ing, mamed * Brhatsabdaratna '
which has been written by Hari-
diksita, although some scholars
beiieve that it was written by
Nagesa who ascribed it to his
preceptor. For details see लधुराब्दरत्न,
इरिनाथद्विवेदी a grammarian of the
. nineteenth century who has written
a commentary named अकाण्डताण्डव
on NigeSa's Paribhijenduse-
khara.
दृग्मिास्कर ( अग्निहोत्री ) a grammarian
of the Deccan who lived in the
seventeenth century at Nsik and
wrote commentaries on grammar-
works out of which his treatise on
Paribhass ( परिभाषाभास्कर ) written
independently but based upon
Sfradeva's Paribhagavrtti, deserves
a special notice and mention.
इरिराम ( इरिराम केशव काळ ) a modern
grammarian who has written a
commentary named Ksik on
Kondabhatta's Vaiyakaranabh∂-
sanasra. He lived in the second
half of the eighteenth century and
the commentary Kasik was
written by him in 1797, Heis said
to have been a pupil of the great

इार्श्वछभ 413
हेतुमण्णिच्
grammarian BhairavamiSra.
इरिवल्लभ a grammarian whohas writt-
en commentaries named दर्षणा on the
Vaiyakaranabhuisanasara of Kond-
abhatta, and Laghubhusanakanti
on the Sabdakaustubha of Bhattoji
Diksita.
इरशाखी ( भागवत ) a grammarian of
the nineteenth century who has
written Vakyarthacandrika, a
commentary on NageSa's Paribha-
Sendusekhara.
इर्षवद्धनस्वामिन् a fairly old grammarian
who wrote an extensive metrical
compendium on genders named
लिङ्गmनुशासन on which a commentary
was written by a grammarian
named शाब्रुवासेन्. These gramma-
rians were,of course, different from
the reputed king इर्षवर्धन and the ;
Mimarhsaka शाबरस्वामिन्.
दृढ a short term ( प्रत्याहृार ) for conso-
nants, made up of the first letter
. हृ in इयवरट् and the last letter ＾ in
हृल्. The term is universally used
for the word व्यञ्जन in Panini's gra-
mmar; cf. इलेीनन्तराः संयेग: P.I. 1.7.
हृलन्ताच्च I. 2.10 etc.
इलन्त a term used for words ending
in consonants; cf. हृलन्तस्येत्येवं भविष्यति
M. Bh. on P.I.1.3 Vºrt.10; cf. also
the term हृलन्तलक्षणा वृद्धि ' for the
Wrddhi prescribed by the rule
वदव्रजहृलन्तस्याच: P.WII. 2. 3.
इलादि beginning with a consonant;
cf. हृलादयेो विभक्तय:, M.Bh. on P. II.
4.32 Vart. 2; धातुर्य एकाज् हृलादि: M.
Bh. on P. III. l . 22. Vart. 2. etc.
इलादिशेष a term frequently used by
commentators for the omission of
all consonants except the initial
one in the reduplicative syllable
as prescribed by the rule of Panini
इलादिः इष: VII. 4. 60. The word
* इलादि:्ष ' as one word, is also
found used in the samesense.
दृल्स्वरप्राप्ति a possibility of the applica-
tion ofan accent to the consonant
by the literal interpretation ofrules
prescribing an accent for the first or
the last letter ofa word, to prevent
which a ruling is laid down that
a consonant is not to be accented;
gf. हृल्स्वरप्राप्तौ व्यञ्जनमविद्यमानवत् Par.
Sek. Pari. 80.
दृ¶ a short term ( प्रत्याहार ) for semi-
vowels, हृ, and the fifths, the
fourths and the thirds of the class-
consonants; cf. इदि च P. VI.1.114.
दृर्मारेतt name given to akind ofSvara-
bhakti when the consonant ल् is
followed by य् and the conjunct
consonant ल्ढा is read as ळ्य् or
ल् इ य्; cf. बनस्पते शतवल्शा विरोहृ Tait.
Sarhh. 1. _.
इि (I) personal-ending of the second
pers. sing. substituted for सि in the
imperative mood; cf. सह्यपिच P. III.
4.87; (2) a sign-word used in the
Wajasaneyi-pratisakhya to mark the
termination of the words of the
Adhikarasitra V. Pr.III.5, IV.11.
दुष्करण the use of the sign-word हुष्,
put in the grammar of ApiSali
according to some grammarians
who read हुष्करण for पुष्करण in the
Kaskavrtti on P. IV.3.115.
_
हृदयहारिणी name of a commentary
written by a grammrian named
दण्डनाथ on the Sarasvatikanthabha-
rana ofBhojarja.
हेतु (1) cause: cf नतेः परस्योभयहेतुसंग्रहात्
R. Pr.XI.2: also cf.हृतौ P. II.3.23:
हेतुहेतुमतोर्लिङ्क P.III.3. 126; (2) causal
agent cf. यः कारयति सदृढः Kat. II.
4.15: cf. also तत्प्रयेजको हेतुश्च P. I.
4.55.
हेतुमण्णिच् the affix णिच् added to a
root in the sense of the activity of
the causal agent: see हृतुमत् above;
cf. तत्र हेतुमण्णिचः प्रतिषेधः .P. I.i. 62,
Wrt. 7. _

हेतुमत् 414
_X
हेमचन्द्र
हेतुमत् the activity of the causal
agent to express which a root has
the affix णिच् added to it: cf. हेतु:
स्वतन्त्रस्य कर्तुः प्रयेजक: | तदीयो व्यापार:
प्रेषणादिलक्षणो हेतुमान् ， तस्मिन्नाभधेये धातोर्णि-
च् स्यात् | K38. on P. III. 1.26.
हेमचन्द्र a Jain sage and scholar of
remarkable erudition in the rel-
gious works of the Jainas as also
in several Shstras. He was a resi-
dent of Dhandhuk in Gujarat,
who, like Sahkarācārya took संन्यास-
दी at a very early age and wrote
a very large number of original
books and commentaries, the fotal
number of which may well nigh
exceed fifty, during his long life
of eighty-four years ( 1088 to
ll 2 ). He stayed at Anhilav्-
Patana in the North Gujarat and
Was patronised with extreme re-
werence by King Kumarapla
who in fact, became his dev6ted
Pupil. Besides the well-known
works on the various Shstras like
Kavyanussana, Abhidhanacint-
mani, Desinmaml, Yogasistra,
DvyaSrayakivya, Trialkpu-
Pusacarita and others which are
well-known, he wrote a big
work on grammar called सि्मं
चन्द्रby him,but popularly known by
the hame हेमव्याकरणे or हेम्ब्दानुशासन
The , work consists ' of eight
books or Adhyayas, out of w}्,
the eighth book is devoted 6
"्krit Grammar, and can bc
Styled as a Grammar of all thg
Prakrit dialects. The Sanskri
Grammar of seven chapters is
based practically upon Ping
Adhyay, the rules or sita
＾ fgerring to Vedic words or Wed
afixes or accents being entirely
9rittcd- The wording of th8
Stras is much similar tº tha:66
Pini; at some Places it is even
ideitical. Thc ordr of tha treat-
incrt of the subjects in the सिद्धहेम.
इदानुदासन्त्र is not, however, simi-
lar to that obtaining in the Asta-
dhyy of Pijini. It is so..
what toPicwise as in the Kaha
Vyakarana. The first Adhyaya
and a quarter of the seconda
devoted to Sarhji, Paribhs and
declension; the second Pda ,
the second Adhyaya is devoted tO
kraka, while the third Pada ofitis
devoted to cerebralization and h∂
fourth to the Stripratyayas.TheFirs
two Padas ofthe third Adhyya are
devoted toSamasas or compound
words, while the last two Paas of
the third Adhyaya and the fourth
Adhyaya are devoted to conjuga-
tion The fifth Adhyaya is devoted
to verbal derivatives or krdanta,
while the sixth and the sevent
Adhyyas are devoted to forma-
tions of nouns from nouns, or
taddhita words. On this Sabdव्र-
hussana, which is just:like Prinis
A:idhyiy, the Cighth adhyaya
9f fdemacandra being devoted to
tho.grammar of the Afga language
Similar to Vedic grammar 6f
''ini, Hermacandra has himself
writtef two glosses which are
named लधुदृति and वृहृद्वृक्ष and the
fanous commentary known as
the Brhannyisa. Besides these
works vi2 the ईमशब्दानुशासन, the
two Vrttis on it and the Brha-
Phya, he has given an appendix
vi? the Lingnusasana. The Gra-
Phmar of Hemacandra, in short,
introduced a new system of gram-
mar different from, yet similar to,
that of Panini, which by his fol-
l9wers was made completely
similar to the Paniniya system by
writing works similar to the Sid-

हेमहंसगाणे
415
हृस्व
dhantakaumudf, the Dhtuvrtti,
theManoram and the Paribhagen-
dusekhara.
हेमहंसगणि a grammarian belonging
to the school ofHemacandra, who
lived in the fifteenth century and
wrote a work on Paribhs
named न्यायसंग्रहृ, on which he him-
self wrote a commentary called
न्यायार्थमञ्जूषा and another one call-
ed by the name न्यास.
हेलाराज a learned grammarian who
wrote a commentary on the third
Kanda of the Wakyapadiya of
Bharthari to which he has given
*N the name प्रकीर्णप्रकाश्ा.
हेमकौमुदी an exhaustive commen-
tary on the Sabdanu838ana of
Hemacandra written by a Jain
grammarian Meghavijaya in the
seventeenth century which is
similar to the Siddhāntakaumud
S of Bhattoj Dikgita,
हेमधातुव्याख्या written by a.jain gra-
mmarian named पुण्यतुंदर which
is similar to the Madhavya
Dhtuvrtti, _
हेमवृहृत्प्रक्रिया a work very similar to
the Siddhantakaumudi written
by a comparatively modern Jain
scholar named Girijashankar
Shastr.
हेमवृहद्बुति a gloss written on the
Haima Sabdanussana strapatha
by Hemacandra himself. See
हृमचन्द्र above.
ब्रहृन्यास an extensive critical com-
mentary written by Hemacandra
on his ownwork, Haima Sabdanu-
Ssana. See हेमचन्द्र.
हेमळधुप्राक्रियावृात a topicwise work
based on Hemacandra's Sabdanu- !
Sasana written by Vinayavijaya, a
Jain scholar of grammar.
हेमलघुवृत्ति a short gloss on the Sab-
damussana, written by Hema-
candra himself. See हेमचन्द्र above.
हेमालिङ्गानुशासन a treatise on genders
written by हेमचन्द्र, Seeहेमचन्द्रabove.
SA
ईमलेङ्गानुशासनविवरण a commentary,
written in the seventeenth cen-
tury by Kalyaasagara on the
SA हेमलेङ्गानुशासन,
हेमाळङ्गानुशासनञ्याख्या a commentary
named उद्धार also, written by Jay-
nanda on the हैमलिङ्गानुशासन.
हेमव्याकरण a treatise on grammar
written by हेमचन्द्र, called by the
name हेमशब्दानुशासन. Seeहेमचन्द्र above.
↑ हेमशाब्दानुशासन a treatise on gram-
mar written by Hemacandra.
See हेमचन्द्र above.
हेमाब्दानुशासनलधुन्यास a short comm-
entary on Hemacandra'sSabdanu-
Sव्रsana written by Devendrastri.
हेमाब्दानुशासनव्राते a short gloss call-
ed अवचूरि also, written by a Jain
grammarian नन्दसुन्दर on the ईम-
इब्दानुद्भासन. _
ह्यस्तनी imperfect tense; a term
used by ancient grammarians for
the affixes of the immediate past
tense, but not comprising the
present day, corresponding to the
term लङ्क of Pafini. The term is
found in the Katantra and Haima-
candra grammars; cf. Kt. III.
1.23, 27; cf. Hema. III. 3.9.
इस्व short, a term used in connec-
tion with the short vowels taking
a umit of time measured by one
matra for their utterance: cf.
ऊकालेोज्इरस्वदीर्घप्लुत: P. I. 2.27.

सः ग्रन्थप्रशास्ति ! )
प्रातिशाख्यमहृाभाष्यर्कौमुदीकाशिाकादिकान् |
ग्रन्थान् वाक्यपदीयादींश्चाभ्यस्य श्रमपूर्वकम् । ' |
ग्रन्थानां ग्रन्थकाराणां नामानि प्रत्ययांस्तथा |
विशिष्टज्ञााख्नीयार्थस्य वाचकान् पारिभाषिकान् , R !
शब्दान् समीक्ष्य संज्ञादीनादेइानागमांस्तथा |
यदारब्धं संग्रथनं कालात् प्राक् सुबह्वीर्मया | 3 |
अभ्यंकरोपाहृकुले वासुदेवस्य सूनुना |
कादिानायाभिधनेदं कोषरूपं समापितम् | 9 |
शालिवाहृनढाकेस्मिन्नष्टाद्इाइतीत्त् !
त्रयशील्याधिकवर्षेस्मिश्चैत्रस्य प्रतिपत्तिथौ | 4 |
द्वाग् व्याकरणकीषाख्यं कृपया परया प्रभोः !
निव्यूहं कार्यमतन्मे कुर्याद्विद्वहृदि स्थितम् । | |
इह्य व्याकरण शाखेत्र ग्रन्थभूयस्त्वकारणात् |
कीषाहं बहृवः इाब्दा दिङ्मात्रामह्य दर्शितम् | 9 |
बुद्धिवैचित्रयतः केचित् क्रीषानहुः स्थिता यादि '
शब्दास्तदहं गलिताः प्रार्थये क्षम्यतां बुधैः | < !




